       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




            Preface



            This book is based on my notes from lectures to students of electrical, elec-
            tronic, and computer engineering at South Bank University. It presents


ww          a first year degree/diploma course in engineering mathematics with an
            emphasis on important concepts, such as algebraic structure, symme-
            tries, linearity, and inverse problems, clearly presented in an accessible


   w.Ea
            style. It encompasses the requirements, not only of students with a good
            maths grounding, but also of those who, with enthusiasm and motiva-
            tion, can make up the necessary knowledge. Engineering applications
            are integrated at each opportunity. Situations where a computer should


       syE  be used to perform calculations are indicated and ‘hand’ calculations
            are encouraged only in order to illustrate methods and important special
            cases. Algorithmic procedures are discussed with reference to their effi-


                       ngi
            ciency and convergence, with a presentation appropriate to someone new
            to computational methods.
               Developments in the fields of engineering, particularly the extensive

                           n
            use of computers and microprocessors, have changed the necessary sub-

                                         eer
            ject emphasis within mathematics. This has meant incorporating areas
            such as Boolean algebra, graph and language theory, and logic into


                                                      ing
            the content. A particular area of interest is digital signal processing,
            with applications as diverse as medical, control and structural engineer-
            ing, non-destructive testing, and geophysics. An important consideration

                                                                    .ne
            when writing this book was to give more prominence to the treatment
            of discrete functions (sequences), solutions of difference equations and z

            approach to engineering problems.
                                                                        t
            transforms, and also to contextualize the mathematics within a systems




                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
