                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




             1                       Sets and functions


1.1 Introduction                     Finding relationships between quantities is of central importance in

ww                                   engineering. For instance, we know that given a simple circuit with a
                                     1000  resistance then the relationship between current and voltage is
                                     given by Ohm’s law, I = V /1000. For any value of the voltage V we can

   w                 .Ea
                                     give an associated value of I . This relationship means that I is a function
                                     of V . From this simple idea there are many other questions that need
                                     clarifying, some of which are:


                        syE          1. Are all values of V permitted? For instance, a very high value of the
                                        voltage could change the nature of the material in the resistor and the
                                        expression would no longer hold.

                                               ngi
                                     2. Supposing the voltage V is the equivalent voltage found from con-
                                        sidering a larger network. Then V is itself a function of other voltage


                                                   n
                                        values in the network (see Figure 1.1). How can we combine the func-


                                                                  eer
                                        tions to get the relationship between this current we are interested in
                                        and the actual voltages in the network?
                                     3. Supposing we know the voltage in the circuit and would like to know

                                                                               ing
                                        the associated current. Given the function that defines how current
                                        depends on the voltage can we find a function that defines how the


                                                                                            .ne
                                        voltage depends on the current? In the case where I = V /1000, it is
                                        clear that V = 1000I . This is called the inverse function.


                                                                                                t
                                        Another reason exists for better understanding of the nature of func-
                                     tions. In Chapters 5 and 6, we shall study differentiation and integration.
                                     This looks at the way that functions change. A good understanding of
                                     functions and how to combine them will help considerably in those
                                     chapters.
                                        The values that are permitted as inputs to a function are grouped
                                     together. A collection of objects is called a set. The idea of a set is very
                                     simple, but studying sets can help not only in understanding functions
                                     but also help to understand the properties of logic circuits, as discussed
                                     in Chapter 10.




Figure 1.1 The voltage V is
an equivalent voltage found
by considering the combined
effect of circuit elements in
the rest of the network.



                                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
