                             Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


8 Sets and functions




Figure 1.17 The relation
boy → sister. Some boys
have more than one sister
and some have none at all.




                                 Functions
                                 Functions are relations where the pairing is always possible. Functions
                                 are like mathematical machines. For each input value there is always

 ww                              exactly one output value.
                                    Calculators output function values. For instance, input 2 into a cal-
                                 culator, press 1/x and the calculator will display the number 0.5. The

    w                 .Ea
                                 output value is called the image of the input value. The set of input values
                                 is called the domain and the set containing all the images is called the
                                 codomain.
                                    The function y = 1/x is displayed in Figure 1.18 using arrows to link

                         syE     input values with output values.
                                    Functions can be represented by letters. If the function of the above
                                 example is given the letter f to represent it then we can write


                                 f : x →
                                            1ngi
                                            x
                                                 n             eer
                                 This can be read as ‘f is the function which when input a value for x gives
Figure 1.18 An arrow
diagram of the function
y = 1/x .                                                                   ing
                                 the output value 1/x’ . Another way of giving the same information is:


                                 f (x) =
                                         1
                                         x
                                                                                         .ne
                                 It does not mean the same as f times x.                     t
                                 f (x) represents the image of x under the function f and is read as ‘f of x’.

                                    f (x) = 1/x means ‘the image of x under the function f is given by
                                 1/x’ but is usually read as ‘f of x equals 1/x’.
                                    Even more simply, we usually use the letter y to represent the output
                                 value, the image, and x to represent the input value. The function is
                                 therefore summed up by y = 1/x.
                                    x is a variable because it can take any value from the set of values in
                                 the domain. y is also a variable but its value is fixed once x is known.
                                 So x is called the independent variable and y is called the dependent
                                 variable.
                                    The letters used to define a function are not important. y = 1/x is the
                                 same as z = 1/t is the same as p = 1/q provided that the same input
                                 values (for x, t, or q) are allowed in each case.
                                    More examples of functions are given in arrow diagrams in
                                 Figures 1.19(a) and 1.20(a). Functions are more usually drawn using
                                 a graph, rather than by using an arrow diagram. To get the graph the
                                 codomain is moved to be at right angles to the domain and input and
                                 output values are marked by a point at the position (x, y). Graphs are
                                 given in Figures 1.19(b) and 1.20(b).

                                                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
