                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                                     Sets and functions 9

                                       Continuous functions and discrete
                                       functions applied to signals
                                       Functions of particular interest to engineers are either functions of a real
                                       number or functions of an integer. The function given in Figure 1.19 is
                                       an example of a real function and the function given in Figure 1.20 is an
                                       example of a function of an integer, also called a discrete function.
                                          Often, we are concerned with functions of time. A variable voltage
                                       source can be described by giving the voltage as it depends on time, as also
                                       can the current. Other examples are: the position of a moving robot arm,
                                       the extension or compression of car shock absorbers and the heat emission
                                       of a thermostatically controlled heating system. A voltage or current
                                       varying with time can be used to control instrumentation or to convey
                                       information. For this reason it is called a signal. Telecommunication
                                       signals may be radio waves or voltages along a transmission line or light
                                       signals along an optical fibre.

ww                                        Time, t, can be represented by a real number, usually non-negative.
                                       Time is usually taken to be positive because it is measured from some


   w
                                       reference instant, for example, when a circuit switch is closed. If time is
                                       used to describe relative events then it can make sense to refer to negative

                      .Ea              time. If lightning is seen 1 s before a thunderclap is heard then this can
                                       be described by saying the lightning happened at −1 s or alternatively


                         syE
                                       that the thunderclap was heard at 1 s. In the two cases, the time origin
                                       has been chosen differently. If time is taken to be continuous and rep-
                                       resented by a real variable then functions of time will be continuous or


                                                 ngi
                                       piecewise continuous. Examples of graphs of such functions are given in
                                       Figure 1.21.



                                                     n              eer
                                                                                 ing
                                                                                              .ne
Figure 1.19 The function
y = 2x + 1 where x can take
any real value (any number
                                                                                                  t
on the number line). (a) is the
arrow diagram and (b) is the
graph.




Figure 1.20 The function
q = t − 3 where t can take any
integer value (a) is the arrow
diagram and (b) is the graph.



                                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
