                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                                   Sets and functions         21

                                      Example 1.19       Calculate y = (2x + 1)3 when x = 2
                                      Solution Remember the order of operations discussed in Chapter 1 of the
                                      Background Mathematics booklet available on the companion website.
                                      The operations are performed in the following order:
                                        Start with x = 2 then

                                      2x = 4
                                      2x + 1 = 5
                                      (2x + 1)3 = 125

                                      So, there are three operations involved
                                      1.   multiply by 2,
                                      2.   add on 1,
                                      3.   take the cube.

ww                                       This way of breaking down functions can be pictured using boxes
                                      to represent each operation that makes up the function, as was used to

   w                  .Ea
                                      represent equations in Chapter 3 of the Background Mathematics booklet
                                      available on the companion website. The whole function can be thought
                                      of as a machine, represented by a box. For each value x, from the domain
                                      of the function that enters the machine, there is a resulting image, y,

                         syE          which comes out of it. This is pictured in Figure 1.26.
                                         Inside of the box, we can write the name of the functions or the expres-
                                      sion which gives the function rule. A composite function box can be
Figure 1.26 A function
pictured as a machine                            ngi
                                      broken into different stages, each represented by its own box. The function
                                      y = (2x + 1)3 breaks down as in Figure 1.27.
represented by a box.
x represents the input value,
any value of the domain,
y represents the output, the
                                                     n
                                         y = (3x − 4)4 can be broken down as in Figure 1.28.


                                                                   eer
image of x under the function.
                                                                                ing
Figure 1.27 The function
y = (2x + 1)3 decomposed                                                                     .ne
into its composite operations.
                                                                                                 t
Figure 1.28 The function
y = (3x − 4)4 decomposed
into its composite operations.




                                      The inverse of a function
                                      The inverse of a function is a function which will take the image under
                                      the function back to its original value. If f −1 (x) is the inverse of f (x)
                                      then

                                      f −1 (f (x)) = x
                                      (f −1 ◦ f ) : x  → x



                                                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
