                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


40   Functions and their graphs




 ww
    w                  .Ea
                          syE
                                                    ngi
is only one value of y for each value of x. (b) (i) y =
                                                        n              eer
Figure 2.17 Reflections in the line y = x produce the inverse relation. (a) (i) y = 2x ; (ii) y = log2 (x ). The
                                                                      √ y = x . The inverse is a function as there
second graph is obtained from the first by reflecting in the dotted line
                                                      √ x ; (ii) y = ± x . The second graph is found by reflecting

                                                                                    ing
                                                         2

the first graph in the line y = x . Notice that y = ± x is not a function as there is more that one possible
value of y for each value of x > 0.


                                                                                                 .ne
                                                                                                     t
                                            In Chapter 1, we defined the inverse function as taking any image
                                         back to its original value. Check this with the graph of y = 2x in
                                         Figure 2.17(a): x = 1 gives y = 2. In the inverse function, y = log2 (x),
                                         substitute 2, which gives the result of 1, which is back to the original
                                         value.                                    √
                                            However, the inverse of y = x 2 , y ± x, shown in Figure 2.17(b), is
                                         not a function as there is more than one y value for a single value of x.
                                            To understand this problem more fully, perform the following exper-
                                         iment. On a calculator enter −2 and square it (x 2 ) giving 4. Now take
                                         the square root. This gives the answer 2, which is not the number we first
                                         started with, and hence we can see that the square root is not a true inverse
                                         of squaring. However, we get away with calling it the inverse because it
                                         works if only positive values of x are considered. To test if the inverse
                                         of any function exists, draw a line along any value of y = constant.
                                         If, wherever the line is drawn, there is ever more than one x value
                                         which gives the same value of y then the function has no inverse func-
                                         tion. In this situation, the function is called a ‘many-to-one’ function.
                                         Only ‘one-to-one’ functions have inverses. Figure 2.18 has examples
                                         of functions with an explanation of whether they are ‘one-to-one’ or
                                         ‘many-to-one’.

                                                                    Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
