                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




             3                      Problem solving
                                    and the art of the
                                    convincing
                                    argument
ww
   w                 .Ea
3.1 Introduction                    Mathematics is used by engineers to solve problems. This usually involves

                        syE         developing a mathematical model. Just as when building a working model
                                    aeroplane we would hope to include all the important features, the same
                                    thing applies when building a mathematical model. We would also like to

                                              ngi
                                    indicate the things we have had to leave out because they were too fiddly
                                    to deal with, and also those details that we think are irrelevant to the


                                                  n
                                    model. In the case of a mathematical model the things that have been left


                                                                 eer
                                    out are listed under assumptions of the model. To build a mathematical
                                    model, we usually need to use scientific rules about the way things in the
                                    world behave (e.g. Newton’s laws of motion, conservation of momentum

                                                                              ing
                                    and energy, Ohm’s law, Kirchoff’s laws for circuits, etc.) and use num-
                                    bers, variables, equations, and inequalities to express the problem in a
                                    mathematical language.
                                                                                           .ne
                                       Some problems are very easy to describe mathematically. For instance:


                                                                                               t
                                    ‘Three people sitting in a room were joined by two others, how many
                                    people are there in the room in total?’ This can be described by the sum
                                    3 + 2 =? and can be solved easily as 3 + 2 = 5.
                                       The final stage of solving the problem is to translate it back into the
                                    original setting – the answer is: ‘there are 5 people in the room in total’.
                                       Assumptions were used to solve this problem. We assumed that no
                                    one else came in or left the room in the meantime and we made general
                                    assumptions about the stability of the room, for example, the building
                                    containing it did not fall down. However, these assumptions are so obvious
                                    that they do not need to be listed. In more complex problems it is necessary
                                    to list important assumptions as they may have relevance as to the validity
                                    of the solution.
                                       Another example is as follows: ‘There are three resistors in series in a
                                    circuit, two of the resistors are known to have resistance of 3 and 4 ohm,
                                    respectively. The voltage source is a battery of 12 V and the current is
                                    measured as 1 A. What is the resistance of the third resistor?’
                                       To help express the problem in a mathematical form we may draw a
                                    circuit diagram as in Figure 3.1.
                                       The problem can be expressed mathematically by using Ohm’s law
                                    and the fact that an equivalent resistance to resistances in series is given
Figure 3.1 A simple circuit.        by the sum of the individual resistances. If x is the unknown value of the

                                                              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
