                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


58   Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument

                              third resistance and V = RI where R = R1 + R2 + R3 , we obtain:

                              12 = (3 + 4 + x)1

                                The expression of the mathematical problem has taken the form of an
                              equation where we now need to find x, the value of the third resistance.
                                The main assumptions that have been used to build this mathematical
                              model are:
                              (1) There are such things as pure resistors that have no capacitance or
                                  inductance.
                              (2) Resistances remain constant and are not affected by any possible
                                  temperature changes or other environmental effects.
                              (3) The battery gives a constant voltage that does not deteriorate with
                                  time.
                              (4) The battery introduces no resistance to the circuit.


ww                               These assumptions are simplifications that are acceptable because
                              although the real world cannot behave with the simplicity of the
                              mathematical model, the amount of error introduced by making these

   w              .Ea
                              assumptions is small.
                                 Once we have the solution of a mathematical model then it should
                              be tested against a real-life situation to see whether the model behaves
                              reasonably closely to reality. Once the model has been accepted then it

                     syE      can be used to predict the behaviour of the system for input values other
                              than those that it has been tested for.
                                 The stages in solving a problem are as follows:
                              (1)
                                         ngi
                                  Take to real problem and express it as a mathematical one using any
                                  necessary scientific rules and assumptions about the behaviour of


                                  made.
                                             n
                                  the system and using letters to represent any unknown quantities.

                                                            eer
                                  Include an account of any important assumptions and simplifications


                                  mathematics.
                                                                        ing
                              (2) Solve the mathematical problem using your knowledge of

                              (3) Translate the mathematical solution back into the setting of your
                                  original problem.
                                                                                      .ne
                              (4) Test the model solutions for some values to check that it behaves
                                  like the real-life problem.
                                                                                          t
                                 Most mathematical problems are expressed by using equations, or
                              inequalities, differential or difference equations, or by expressing a prob-
                              lem geometrically or a combination of all of these. We might need to
                              incorporate a random element which results in the need to use a prob-
                              abilistic model. In many of the following chapters we will look at the
                              modelling process in more detail as we come across new mathematical
                              tools and the situations in which they are used. To perform the entire
                              modelling cycle properly, we need to be able to test our results in a real-
                              life situation in order to reconsider assumptions used in the model. This
                              would require access to engineering situations and tools. For this reason,
                              engineering mathematics books tend to concentrate on those models that
                              are commonly used by engineers. Many of the applied problems pre-
                              sented in the following chapters however do present an opportunity to
                              move from an English language description of a problem to a mathemati-
                              cal language description of a problem, which is an important step in the
                              modelling process.
                                 In this chapter, we will look at translating a problem into mathematical
                              language and, for the main part of the chapter, we concentrate on solving
                              a mathematical problem and the reasoning that is involved in so doing.

                                                         Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
