                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                      Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument                   59

                      To solve the problem using your knowledge of mathematics, we need to
                      use the ideas of mathematical statements and how to decide whether, and
                      express the fact that, one statement leads logically on to the next. We
                      shall mainly use examples of solving equations and inequalities although
                      the same ideas apply to the solving of all problems.




                      The stages in expressing a problem in mathematical language can be
3.2 Describing        summarized as:
a problem in          (1) Assign letters to represent the unknown quantities.
mathematical          (2) Write down the known facts using equations and inequalities, and
                          using drawings and diagrams where necessary.
language              (3) Express the problem to be solved mathematically.

ww                       This is not a simple process because it involves a great deal of inter-
                      pretation of the original problem. It is useful to try to limit the number

   w      .Ea
                      of unknowns used as much as possible, or the problem may appear more
                      difficult than necessary.




             syE      Example 3.1 Express the following problem mathematically: A web
                      development company employs a freelance web designer and a freelance

                                ngi
                      graphic designer to put up listings for new businesses on to their virtual
                      business park website. Business customers are charged e200 per year


                                    n
                      for a listing. The fixed costs of the web development company amount


                                                   eer
                      to e2000 per week over 52 weeks in the year. The web designer charges
                      e80 per listing and the graphic designer e100 per listing and both can


                                                                ing
                      prepare these at the rate of 2.4 listings in a day. The freelancers work for
                      up to 200 days per year. How many listings does the company need in
                      the first year to break even?


                                                                             .ne
                      Solution The mathematical problem can be expressed by firstly assign-


                                                                                 t
                      ing letters to some of the unknown quantities and then write down all the
                      known facts as equations or inequalities.
                         First assign letters: Total number of listings of businesses on the park
                      in the first year is L. LW is the number of listings prepared by the web
                      designer and LG is the number of listings prepared by the graphic designer.
                      The costs are K per year and the profit is P . The known facts can be
                      expressed as follows:

                      L = LW + L G

                      This expresses the fact that the total number of listings L is made up of
                      those prepared by the web designer and those prepared by the graphic
                      designer. As there are up to 200 working days in a year and they both do
                      a maximum of 2.4 listings per day.

                      0 ⩽ LW ⩽ 480,      0 ⩽ LG ⩽ 480

                      The costs, K, are; fixed costs of 2000 × 52, plus the cost of the freelance
                      web designer at 80LW , plus the cost of the freelance graphic designer at

                                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
