                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


60   Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument

                                     100LG . This can be expressed as:

                                     K = 104 000 + 80LW + 100LG .

                                     We need to relate the profit to the other variables. As the profit is 200
                                     multiplied by the number of jobs minus the total costs, we get:

                                     P = 200L − K

                                     Finally, we must express the mathematical problem that we would like to
                                     solve. For the web development business to make a profit in the first year
                                     then the profit must be positive, hence we get the problem expressed as:
                                     Find the minimum L such that P > 0.


 ww                                  Example 3.2 Express the following in mathematical language: A car

    w                .Ea
                                     brake pedal, as represented in Figure 3.2(a) is pivoted at point A. What
                                     is the force on the brake cable if a constant force of 900 N is applied by
                                     the driver’s foot and the pedal is stationary.


                        syE          Solution First, we assign letters to the unknowns. Let F = the force on
                                     the brake cable.
                                        In order to write down the known facts we need to consider what

                                                ngi
                                     scientific laws can be used. As the force applied on the pedal initially
                                     provides a turning motion then we know to use the ideas of moments.


                                                    n
                                     The moment of a force about an axis is the product of the force F and its


                                                                   eer
                                     perpendicular distance, x, to the line of action of the force. Furthermore,
                                     as the pedal is now stationary, then the moments must be balanced so the
                                     clockwise moment must equal the anti-clockwise moment.

                                                                               ing
                                        To use this fact, we need to use two further measurements, currently
                                     unknown, the perpendicular distance from the line of action of the force


                                                                                             .ne
                                     provided by the driver to the axis, A. This is marked as x1 m on the diagram
                                     in Figure 3.2(b). The other distance is the perpendicular distance from


                                                                                                 t
                                     the line of action of the force on the cable to the axis A. This is marked
                                     as x2 m in Figure 3.2(b).
                                        We can now write down the known facts, involving the unknowns
                                     x1 , x2 , and F . From the right angle triangle containing x1 , we have




Figure 3.2 (a) A representation of a car brake pedal. (b) The same diagram as (a) with some unknown
quantities marked and triangles used to formulate the problem.


                                                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
