                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                      Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument                  61

                      (converting 210 mm = 0.21 m),
                                   x1
                      cos(40◦ ) =
                                  0.21
                      From the right angle triangle containing x2 , we have (converting 75 mm =
                      0.075 m),
                                    x2
                      cos(15◦ ) =
                                  0.075
                      The moments of the forces can now be calculated and equated. The clock-
                      wise moment is 800x1 and the anti-clockwise moment is given by F x2
                      and hence we have:
                      800x1 = F x2
                         Finally, we need to express the problem we are trying to solve. In this
                      case it is simply ‘what is F ?’.


ww                       Note that in both Examples 3.1 and 3.2, certain modelling assumptions
                      had been used in order to formulating the ‘natural language’ description
                      of the problem that we were given. For instance, it is probable that the

   w      .Ea
                      business park listings for the business park in Example 3.1 are not all
                      identical and therefore average figures for times and costings have been
                      used. Similarly, in Example 3.2 no mention has been made of friction
                      would provide an extra force to consider. Here we have only consid-

             syE      ered the transition from natural language and accompanying diagrams
                      to the mathematical problem. We have implicitly assumed that the mod-
                      elling process can be performed in two stages. From real-life problem

                                 ngi
                      to a natural language description which incorporates some simplifying
                      assumptions, and then from there to a mathematical description. In reality


                                     n
                      modelling a system is much more involved. We would probably repeat


                                                  eer
                      stages in this process if we decided that the mathematical description was
                      too complex and return to the real-life situation in order to make new
                      assumptions.

                                                               ing
                         We are now in a position to discuss mathematical statements and how
                      to move from the statement of the problem to finding the desired solution.


                                                                            .ne
3.3
Propositions
                                                                                t
                      When we first set up a problem to be solved, we write down mathematical
                      expressions like:
                      2 + 3 =?                                                              (3.1)
and predicates
                      and
                      12 = (3 + 4 + x) · 1                                                 (3.2)
                      These are mathematical statements with an unknown value. Statements
                      containing unknowns (or variables) are called predicates. A predicate can
                      be either true or false depending on the value(s) substituted into it. When
                      values are substituted into a predicate it becomes a simple proposition. If
                      in Equation (3.1) we substitute 5 for the question mark we get:
                      2+3=5        ⇔     5=5      which is true.
                      If, however, we substitute 6 we get:
                      2+3=6        ⇔     5=6      which is false.
                      2 + 3 = 5 and 2 + 3 = 6 are examples of propositions. These are simple
                      statements that can be assigned as either true or false. They contain no

                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
