                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


68   Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument

                                      equation, and has one more beside. Implication is expressed in English
                                      by using phrases like ‘If . . . then . . .’.
                                         An expression involving an implication cannot always be turned the
                                      other way around in the same way as those involving equivalence can.
                                      An example of this is given by the following statement. It is true that: ‘If
                                      I am going to work then I take the car’ which can be written using the
                                      implication symbol as:

                                      ‘I am going to work’ ⇒ ‘I take the car’

                                      However, it is not true that:

                                      ‘If I take the car then I am going to work’



 ww                                   This is because there are more occasions when I take the car than simply
                                      going to work.


    w                   .Ea
                                        More examples are:

                                      ‘I only clean the windows if it is sunny’
                                      ‘I am cleaning the windows’ ⇒ ‘it is sunny’

                           syE        This does not mean that ‘If it is sunny then I clean the windows’, as there

                                                  ngi
                                      are some sunny days when I have to go to work or just laze in the garden,
                                      or I am on holiday.


                                                      n
                                         An implication sign can be written, and read, from left to right


                                                                      eer
                                           ‘It is sunny’ ⇐ ‘I am cleaning the windows’



                                      the windows’.                               ing
                                      which I can still read as ‘I am cleaning the windows therefore it is sunny’
                                      or I could try rearranging the sentence as ‘Only if it is sunny will I clean


                                                                                               .ne
                                         The various ways of expressing these sentiments can get quite involved.
                                      The important point to remember is that p ⇒ q means that q must be true




Figure 3.5 P is the solution
                                      besides. Going back to equations or inequalities:
                                                                                                   t
                                      for all the occasions that p is true, but q could be true on more occasions



                                      p⇒q
set of p, Q is the solution set
of q. p ⇒ q means that
P ⊆ Q. D is the domain of p           means that the solution set, P, of p is a subset of the solution set, Q, of q.
and q.                                This is pictured in Figure 3.5.
                                         We can now see that for two equations or inequalities to be equivalent
                                      then p ⇒ q and q ⇒ p. This means that their solution sets are exactly
                                      the same (Figure 3.6).


                                      Example 3.8     Fill in the correct symbol in each case either ⇒, ⇐ or ⇔

                                      (a) x 2 − 9 = 0 . . . x = −3
                                      (b) x = − 21 . . . (1/(2x − 5)(x + 1)) = − 13 where x ∈ R, x = 5,
Figure 3.6 P is the solution              x = −1
set of p and Q is the solution
set of q. Then p ⇔ q means
                                      (c) (x − 3)(x − 1) > 0 · · · x > 3 ∨ x < 1
that P = Q.

                                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
