                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


72   Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument

                                Another useful symbol is ∃, which means, ‘there exists’. This can
                              be used to express the fact that every real number has an inverse under
                              addition. Hence, we get

                              ∀a ∈ R, ∃b,     a + b = 0.

                                  If the symbol ∃ is used with a predicate about its free variable, it
                              becomes a simple proposition which is either true or false. In the case
                              of the example given concerning the inverse, this is an axiom of the
                              real numbers and we can just state it is true. Other statements involving
                              existence will need some justification. Proving existence is simpler than
                              disproving it. If I were to state ‘There exists a blue moon in the universe’,
                              to prove this to be true I only need to find one blue moon but to disprove
                              it I must find all the moons in the universe and show that not one of them
                              is blue.
                                  In other words, to show that some value exists which makes a certain

ww                            predicate into a true proposition then we only need to find that value and
                              demonstrate that the resulting proposition is true. To show that no value
                              exists, however, is more difficult and if the domain of interest is a set of

   w              .Ea
                              numbers we need to present an argument about any member of the set.


                              Example 3.10      Are the following true or false? Justify your answer.

                     syE      (a) ∃x ∈ R, (x + 2)(x − 1) = 0
                              (b) ∃x ∈ R, x 2 + 4 < 0

                              Solution
                                          ngi
                              (a)
                                              n
                                     ∃x ∈ R, (x + 2)(x − 1) = 0

                                                              eer
                              To show this is true, we only need find one value of x which makes the
                              equality correct. For instance, take x = −2: when x = −2, (x + 2)(x −

                                                                         ing
                              1) = 0 becomes (−2 + 2)(−2 − 1) = 0 ⇔ 0 = 0, which is true.
                                Therefore, ∃x ∈ R, (x + 2)(x − 1) = 0 is true.
                              (b)    ∃x ∈ R, x 2 + 4 < 0
                                                                                      .ne
                              Trying a few values for x (e.g. −1, 0, 20, −2) we might suspect that

                              convince ourselves of this.                                 t
                              this statement is false. We need to present a general argument in order to

                                 x 2 is always positive or zero, that is, x 2 ⩾ 0 for all x. If we then add
                              on 4, then for all x, x 2 + 4 ⩾ 4 and as 4 is bigger than 0.
                              x 2 + 4 > 0 for all x; hence,
                              ∃x ∈ R, x 2 + 4 < 0 is false.




3.8 Other                     Predicates are often used in software engineering. Some simpler appli-
                              cations are:
applications of                (a)To express the condition under which a program block will be carried
predicates                        out (or a loop will continue execution).
                              (b) To express a program specification in terms of its pre- and post-
                                  conditions.


                              Example 3.11 Express the following in pseudo-code: print x and y if
                              y is a multiple of x and x is an integer between 1 and 100 inclusive.

                                                         Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
