              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                   Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument                    73

                   Solution Pseudo-code is a system of writing algorithms which is similar
                   to some computer languages but not in any particular computer language.
                   We can use any symbols we like as long as the meaning is clear.
                      y is a multiple of x means that if y is divided by x then the result is an
                   integer. This can be expressed as
                   y
                     ∈Z
                   x
                   The condition that x must lie between 1 and 100 can be expressed as
                   x ⩾ 1 and x ⩽ 100. Combining these conditions gives the following
                   interpretation for the algorithm:
                      y                           
                   if     ∈ Z ∧ x ⩾ 1 ∧ x ⩽ 100      then
                       x
                      print x, y


ww
                   endif


                   Example 3.12 A program is designed to take a given whole positive

   w    .Ea
                   number, x, greater than 1, and find two factors of x, a and b, which
                   multiplied together give x. a and b should be whole positive numbers
                   different from 1, unless x is prime. Express the pre- and post-conditions
                   for the program.

           syE     Solution Pre-condition is x ∈ N ∧ x > 1.
                      The post-condition is slightly more difficult to express. Clearly ab = x

                              ngi
                   is a statement of the fact that a and b must multiply together to give x.
                   Also a and b must be elements of N. a and b cannot be 1 unless x is
                   prime, this can be expressed by

                                  n             eer
                   (a = 1 ∧ b = 1) ∨ (x is prime).

                   Finally, we have the post-condition as
                                                             ing
                   a · b = x ∧ (a ∈ N) ∧ (b ∈ N) ∧ ((a = 1 ∧ b = 1) ∨ (x is prime)).


                                                                           .ne
3.9 Summary        (1)
                                                                               t
                       The stages in solving a real-life problem using mathematics are:
                       (a) Express the problem as a mathematical one, using any neces-
                            sary scientific rules and assumptions about the behaviour of the
                            system and using letters to represent any unknown quantities.
                            This is called a mathematical model.
                       (b) Solve the mathematical problem by moving from one state-
                            ment to an equivalent statement justifying each stage by using
                            relevant mathematical knowledge.
                       (c) Check the mathematical solution(s) by substituting them into
                            the original formulation of the mathematical problem.
                       (d) Translate the mathematical solution back into the setting of the
                            original problem.
                       (e) Test the model solutions for some realistic values to see how
                            well the model correctly predicts the behaviour of the system.
                            If it is acceptable, then the model can be used to predict more
                            results.
                   (2) A predicate is a mathematical statement containing a variable.
                       Examples of predicates are equations and inequalities.
                   (3) If values are substituted into a predicate it becomes a simple
                       proposition which is either true or false.

                                             Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
