                                       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                              Problem solving and the art of the convincing argument                   75

3.8. A road has a bend with radius of curvature 100 m. The
     road is banked at an angle of 10◦ . At what speed should
     a car take the bend in order not to experience any side
     thrust on the tyres? Use the following assumptions:
     (a) The sideways force needed on the vehicle in order to
         maintain it in circular motion (called the centripetal
         force) = mv 2 /r where r is the radius of curvature
         of the bend, v the velocity, and m the mass of the
         vehicle.
     (b) The only force with a component acting sideways
         on the vehicle, is the reactive force of the ground.       Figure 3.8 A vehicle rounding a banked bend
         This acts in a direction normal to the ground (i.e. we     in the road. R is the reactive force of the ground
         assume no frictional force in a sideways direction).       on the vehicle. The vehicle provides a force of
     (c) The force due to gravity of the vehicle is mg, where       mg, the weight of the vehicle, operating vertically
         m is the mass of the vehicle and g is the acceleration     downwards. The vehicle needs a sideways force
         due to gravity (≈ 9.8 m s−2 ). This acts vertically        of mv 2 /r in order to maintain the locally circular
         downwards. The forces operating on the vehicle and         motion.


ww       ground, in a lateral or vertical direction, are pictured
         in Figure 3.8.



   w                      .Ea
                             syE
                                                           ngi
                                                               n         eer
                                                                                      ing
                                                                                                    .ne
                                                                                                        t




                                                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
