                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




      4                Boolean algebra

4.1 Introduction       Boolean algebra can be thought of as the study of the set {0, 1} with the
                       operations + (or), . (and), and − (not). It is particularly important because
                       of its use in design of logic circuits. Usually, a high voltage represents

ww                     TRUE (or 1), and a low voltage represents FALSE (or 0). The operation
                       of OR (+) is then performed on two voltage inputs, using an OR gate,


   w
                       AND(.) using an AND gate and NOT is performed using a NOT gate. This
                       very simple algebra is very powerful as it forms the basis of computer

          .Ea          hardware.
                          You will probably have noticed that the operations of ∧ (AND), ∨
                       (OR), and ¬ (NOT) used in Chapter 3 for propositions are very similar

             syE       to the operations ∩ (AND), ∪ OR, and (NOT) (complement) used for
                       sets. This connection is not surprising as membership of a set, A, could


                                  ngi
                       be defined using a statements like ‘3 is a member of A’ which is either
                       TRUE or FALSE. In simplifying logic circuits, use is made of the different
                       interpretations that can be put upon the operations and variables. We can

                                      n
                       use truth tables, borrowed from the theory of propositions, as given in

                                                     eer
                       Chapter 3, or we can use Venn diagrams, borrowed from set theory, as
                       given in Chapter 1.


                                                                  ing
                          The first thing we shall examine in this chapter is what do we mean by an
                       algebra and why are we able to skip between these various interpretations.
                       Then we look at implementing and minimizing logic circuits.

                                                                               .ne
4.2 Algebra                                                                        t
                       Before we look at Boolean algebra, we will have a look at some ideas
                       about algebra:

                       (a)   What is an algebra?
                       (b)   What is an operation?
                       (c)   What do we mean by properties (or laws or axioms) of an algebra?

                       An algebra is a set with operations defined on it. In Chapter 1 of the
                       Background Mathematics Notes, available on the companion website
                       for this book, we looked at the algebra of real numbers and defined an
                       operation is a way of combining two numbers to give a single number. We
                       could therefore define an operation as a way of combining two elements
                       of the set to result in another element of the set.


                       Example 4.1     The set of real numbers, R, has the operations + and ., for
                       example,

                       3+5=8        and    3 · 4 = 12

                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
