                                     Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


82     Boolean algebra

                                         Example 4.8       Implement abc̄ + a b̄ + a c̄.
                                         Solution We can use absorption to write this as a b̄ + a c̄ and this can
                                         be implemented as in Figure 4.4 using AND, OR, and NOT gates. Alter-
                                         natively, we can use the distributive and De Morgan’s laws to write the
                                         expression as:

                                         a b̄ + a c̄ = a(b̄ + c̄) = abc

                                         which can be implemented using an AND and a NAND gate.

                                         Minimization and Karnaugh maps
                                         It is clear that there are numbers of possible implementations of the same
                                         logic circuit. However, in order to use less components in building the
                                         circuit it is important to be able to minimize the Boolean expression. There

 ww                                      are several methods for doing this. A popular method is using a Karnaugh
                                         map. Before using a Karnaugh map, the Boolean expression must be
                                         written in the form of a ‘sum of products’. To do this, we may either

    w                       .Ea
                                         use some of the algebraic rules or it may be simpler to produce a truth
                                         table and then copy the 0s and 1s into the Karnaugh map. Example 4.9 is
                                         initially in the sum of product form and Example 4.10 uses a truth table
                                         to find the Karnaugh map.

                               syE       Example 4.9       Minimize the following using a Karnaugh map:


                                                     ngi
                                         ab + āb + a b̄



                                                         n
                                         and draw the implementation of the resulting expression as a logic circuit.

                                                                          eer
                                         Solution Draw a Karnaugh map as in Figure 4.5(a). If there are two
                                         variables in the expression then there are 22 = 4 squares in the Karnaugh

                                                                                     ing
                                         map. Figure 4.5(b) shows a Karnaugh map with the squares labelled term



                                                                                                 .ne
                                                                                                     t
Figure 4.4 (a) An
implementation of
ab c̄ + a b̄ + a c̄ = a b̄ + a c̄.
(b) An alternative
implementation using
a b̄ + a c̄ = abc.




                                         Figure 4.5 (a) A two-variable Karnaugh map representing
                                         ab + āb + a b̄ (b) A two-variable Karnaugh map with all the boxes
                                         labelled. (c) A Karnaugh map is like a Venn diagram. The second row
                                         represents the set a and the second column represents the set b.

                                                                     Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
