                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


84   Boolean algebra

                                       Figure 4.8(b) shows a Karnaugh map with the squares labelled term by
                                       term. Figure 4.8(c) shows the Venn diagram equivalence with sets a, b,
                                       and c. In Figure 4.8(a) we put a 0 or 1 in the square depending on whether
                                       that term is present, as given in the truth table in Table 4.5.
                                          Adjacent 1s indicate that we can simplify the expression. Figure 4.9
                                       indicates how we go about the minimization. We draw a line around any
                                       four adjacent 1s and write down the term representing that section of
                                       the map. The second column represents c and has been encircled. Then
                                       we look for any two adjacent 1s. We are able to encircle the third row,
                                       representing ab. As all the 1s have now been included we know that
                                       c + ab is a minimization of the expression. An implementation of c + ab
                                       is drawn in Figure 4.10.


Figure 4.9 A three-variable
Karnaugh map representing              Example 4.11 Minimize abc̄ + ābd + abcd̄ + a b̄c̄d + abc using a
                                       Karnaugh map and draw the implementation of the resulting expression

 ww
c(b + (ab)) + c̄ab.
                                       as a logic circuit.



    w
                                       Solution Draw a Karnaugh map as in Figure 4.11(a). There are four
                                       variables in the expression therefore there are 24 = 16 squares in the

Figure 4.10 An        .Ea              Karnaugh map. Figure 4.11(b) shows a Karnaugh map with the squares
                                       labelled term by term. Figure 4.11(c) shows the Venn diagram equiv-
                                       alence with sets a, b, c, and d. In Figure 4.11(a), we put a 0 or 1 in
implementation of c + ab.

                         syE           the square depending on whether that term is present in our expression.
                                       However, the term abc̄ involves only three out of the four variables. In
                                       this case, it must occupy two squares. As d could be either 0 or 1 for

                                                  ngi
                                       ‘abc̄’ to be true, we fill in the squares for abc̄d and abc̄ d̄. The num-
                                       ber of squares to be filled with a 1 to represent a certain product is 2m


                                       it is 21 .
                                                      n
                                       where m is the number of missing variables in the expression. In this

                                                                    eer
                                       case, abc̄ has no d term in it so the number of squares representing



                                                                                ing
                                           Adjacent 1s indicate that we can simplify the expression. Figure 4.12
                                       indicates how we go about the minimisation. We draw a line around
                                       any eight adjacent 1s of which there are none. Next we look for any

                                                                                             .ne
                                       four adjacent 1s and write down the term representing that section of
                                       the map. The third row represents ab and has been encircled. The mid-


                                                                                                 t
                                       dle four squares represent bd and have been encircled. Then we look
                                       for any two adjacent 1s. The bottom two squares of the second col-
                                       umn represent a c̄d. As all the 1s have now been included we know that
                                       ab+bd +a c̄d is a minimization of the expression. This is implemented in
                                       Figure 4.13.




Figure 4.11 (a) A four variable Karnaugh map representing ab c̄ + ābd + abc d̄ + a b̄ c̄d + abc. (b) A
four-variable Karnaugh map with all the squares labelled. (c) A Karnaugh map is like a Venn diagram. The
third and fourth rows represent the set a and the second and third rows represent the set b. c is represented
by the third and fourth columns and d by the second and third columns.


                                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
