                                    Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


86    Boolean algebra


Figure 4.15 (a) A Karnaugh
map for the segment labelled
p in Figure 4.14. This has
been copied from the truth
table given in Table 4.5 (b) A
minimization of the Karnaugh
map. The ‘don’t care’ Xs may
be treated as 1s if it is
convenient but they can also
be treated as 0s.




                                          two rows are encircled giving the term a. Now we look for groups of four.
                                          The central four squares represent bd and the third column represents
                                          cd. Finally, we can count the four corner squares as adjacent. This is

 ww                                       because two squares may be considered as adjacent if they are located
                                          symmetrically with respect to any of the lines which divide the Karnaugh


    w                   .Ea
                                          map into equal halves, quarters, or eighths. This means that squares that
                                          could be curled round to meet each other, as if the Karnaugh map where
                                          drawn on a cylinder, are considered adjacent and also the four corner
                                          squares. Here, the four corner squares represent the term b̄ d̄. Hence, the
                                          minimization for p gives

                           syE            p = a + cd + bd + b̄ d̄.



4.5 Summary                               (1)         ngi
                                              An algebra is a set with operations defined on it. A binary operation

                                                          n
                                              as a way of combining two elements of the set to result in another

                                                                         eer
                                              element of the set. A unary operation has only one input element
                                              producing one output.


                                                                                       ing
                                          (2) A Boolean algebra has the operations of AND, OR, and NOT defined
                                              on it and obeys the set of laws given in Section 4.3 as (B1)–(B10).
                                              Examples of a Boolean algebra are: the set of sets in some universal

                                                                                                      .ne
                                              set E , with the operations of ∩, ∪ and ; the set of propositions with
                                              the operations of ∧, ∨, and ¬; the set {0, 1} with the operations ‘.’
                                              +, and −.
                                                                                                          t
                                          (3) Logic circuits can be represented as Boolean expressions. Usually,
                                              a high voltage is represented by 1 or TRUE and a low voltage by
                                              0 or FALSE. There are three basic gates to represent the operators
                                              AND (.), OR (+), and NOT (−).
                                          (4) A Boolean expression may be minimized by first expressing it as a
                                              sum of products and then using a Karnaugh map to combine terms.



4.6 Exercises
4.1 Show the following properties of sets using Venn                    (i) p ∧ q (ii) p ∨ q (iii) ¬p ∨ q
    diagrams:                                                         (iv) p ∧ ¬q (v) ¬(p ∧ q) (vi) ¬p ∨ ¬q.
    (a) A ∪ (A ∩ B) = A                                           (b) Given that p is true and q is false, what is the truth
    (b) A ∪ (B ∩ C) = (A ∪ B) ∩ (A ∪ C)                               value of each part of section (a)?

4.2 p = ‘It rained yesterday’
    q = ‘I used an umbrella yesterday’                        4.3 Show the following properties of propositions using truth
    (a) Construct English sentences to express, (∧ ⇔ ‘and’,       tables
        ∨ ⇔ ‘or’, ¬ ⇔ ‘not’)                                      (a) p ∨ (p ∧ q) ⇔ p (b) ¬(p ∨ q) ⇔ ¬p ∧ ¬q.


                                                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
