                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




      5                Trigonometric
                       functions and
                       waves
ww
   w
5.1 Introduction

          .Ea
                       Waves occur naturally in a number of situations: the movement of dis-
                       turbed water, the passage of sound through the air, vibrations of a plucked
                       string. If the movement of a particular particle is plotted against time, then
                       we get the distinctive wave shape, called a sinusoid. The mathematical


             syE       expression of a wave is found by using the trigonometric functions, sine
                       and cosine. In Chapter 6 of the Background Mathematics Notes on the
                       companion website for this book we looked at right angled triangles and


                                   ngi
                       defined the trigonometric ratios. The maximum angle in a right angled
                       triangle is 90◦ so to find the trigonometric functions, sin(t), cos(t), and
                       tan(t) where t can be extended over the real numbers, we need a new

                                       n
                       way of defining them. This we do by using a rotating rod. Usually the

                                                     eer
                       function will be used to relate, for instance, the height of the rod to time.
                       Therefore, it does not always make sense to think of the input to the cosine


                                                                  ing
                       and sine functions as being an angle. This problem is overcome by using
                       a new measure for the angle called the radian, which easily relates the
                       angle to the distance travelled by the tip of the rotating rod.

                                                                                .ne
                          Waves may interfere with each other, as for instance on a plucked
                       string, where the disturbance bounces off the ends producing a standing


                                                                                    t
                       wave. Amplitude modulation of, for instance, radio waves, works by the
                       superposition of a message on a higher signal frequency. These situations
                       require an understanding of what happens when two, or more cosine or
                       sine functions are added, subtracted, or multiplied and hence we also
                       study trigonometric identities.



                       Consider a rotating rod of length 1. Imagine, for instance, that it is a
5.2                    position marked on a bicycle tyre at the tip of one of the spokes, as the
Trigonometric          bicycle travels along. The distance travelled by the tip of the rod in 1
                       complete revolution is 2π (the circumference of the circle of radius 1).
functions and          The height of the rod (measured from the centre of the wheel), y, can be
radians                plotted against the distance travelled by the tip as in Figure 5.1.
                          Similarly, the position to the right or left of the origin, x, can be
                       plotted against the distance travelled by the tip of the rod as in Figure 5.2.
                       Figure 5.1 defines the function y = sin(t) and Figure 5.2 defines the
                       function x = cos(t).
                          This definition of the trigonometric function is very similar to that
                       used for the ratios in the triangle, if the hypotenuse is of length 1 unit.
                       The definitions become the same for angles up to a right angle if radians

                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
