                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                Trigonometric functions and waves                    91


                                        We can now draw graphs of the functions for all input values t as in
5.3 Graphs and                          Figures 5.5–5.7.
important                                  These are all important examples of periodic functions. To show that
                                        the cos(t) or sin(t) function is periodic, translate the graph to the left or
properties                              right by 2π . The resulting graph will fit exactly on top of the original
                                        untranslated graph. 2π is called the fundamental period as translating
                                        by 4π, 6π, 8π , etc. also results in the graph fitting exactly on top of
                                        the original function. The fundamental period is defined as the smallest
                                        period that has this property and all other periods are multiples of the
                                        fundamental period. This periodic property can be expressed using a
                                        letter, n, to represent any integer, giving

                                        sin(t + 2π n) = sin(t)
                                        cos(t + 2π n) = cos(t)


ww
   w                   .Ea
                          syE           Figure 5.5 The graph of y = sin(t ), where t can take any value.


                                                   ngi
                                        Notice that the function repeats itself every 2π . This shows that the
                                        function is periodic with period 2π. Notice also that the value of sin(t )
                                        is never more than 1 and never less than −1. The function is odd as
                                        sin(−t ) = − sin(t ).

                                                       n             eer
                                                                                  ing
                                                                                                .ne
                                                                                                    t
                                        Figure 5.6 The graph of x = cos(t ), where t can take any value.
                                        Notice that the function repeats itself every 2π. This shows that the
                                        function is periodic with period 2π. Notice also that the value of cos(t )
                                        is never more than 1 and never less than −1. The function is even as
                                        cos(−t ) = cos(t ).



Figure 5.7 The graph of
z = tan(t ), where t can take
any value except odd
multiples of π/2 (for instance
tan(t ) is not defined for
t = π/2, 3π/2, 5π/2). Notice
that the function repeats itself
every π. This shows that the
function is periodic with
period π. The function values
extend from −∞ to ∞, that is,
the range of tan(t ) is all the
real numbers. The function is
odd as tan(−t ) = − tan(t ).



                                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
