                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


92   Trigonometric functions and waves

                              That is, adding or subtracting any multiple of 2π from the value of t gives
                              the same value of the functions x = cos(t) and y = sin(t).
                                 The other important thing to remember about cos(t) and sin(t) is that
                              although the domain of the functions is all the real numbers, the function
                              values themselves lie between −1 and +1

                              −1 ⩽ cos(t) ⩽ 1
                              −1 ⩽ sin(t) ⩽ 1.

                              We say that the functions are bounded by −1 and +1 or, in other words,
                              the range of the cosine and sine functions is [−1, 1].
                                z = tan(t) has fundamental period π. If the graph is translated by
                              π to the left or right, then the resulting graph will fit exactly on top of
                              the original graph. This periodic property can be expressed using n to
                              represent any integer, giving

ww                            tan(t + πn) = tan(t).


   w             .Ea             The values of tan(t) are not bounded. We can also say that −∞ <
                              tan(t) < ∞.



                    syE       Symmetry

                                         ngi
                              Other important properties of these functions are the symmetry of the
                              functions. cos(t) is even, while sin(t) and tan(t) are odd. Unlike the
                              terms odd and even when used to describe numbers, not all functions

                                             n
                              are either odd or even, most are neither. To show that cos(t) is even,

                                                            eer
                              reflect the graph along the vertical axis. The resulting graph is exactly the
                              same as the original graph. This shows that swapping positive t values


                              cos(−t) = cos(t).
                                                                         ing
                              for negative ones has no difference on the function values, that is,



                                                                                      .ne
                                                                                          t
                                Other examples of even functions were given in Chapter 2 and the
                              general property of even functions was given there as f (t) = f (−t). The
                              functions sine and tangent are odd. If they are reflected along the vertical
                              axis then the resulting graph is an upside down version of the original.
                              This shows that swapping positive t values for negative ones gives the
                              negative of the original function. This property can be expressed by

                              sin(−t) = − sin(t)
                              tan(−t) = − tan(t).

                                For a general function, y = f (t), the property of being odd can be
                              expressed by f (−t) = −f (t).


                              The relationships between
                              the sine and cosine
                              Take the graph of sin(t) and translate it to the left by 90◦ or π/2 and
                              we get the graph of cos(t). Equivalently, take the graph of cos(t) and
                              translate it to the right by π/2 and we get the graph of sin(t). Using the

                                                         Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
