                        Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                    Trigonometric functions and waves                95




ww
   w               .Ea
                      syE
                                       ngi
                                           n              eer
                                                                       ing
                                                                                    .ne
Figure 5.9 Continued.
                                                                                        t
                                In Figure 5.11(b) y = 3 cos(2x − 1), has a peak value of 3 and a
                             trough value of −3. Therefore, the amplitude is half the difference =
                             (3 − (−3))/2 = 3. The period is the minimum amount the graph needs
                             to be shifted to the left or right (excluding no shift) in order to fit over
                             the original graph. In this case the period is π . The phase is found by
                             finding the proportion of the cycle that the graph has been shifted to the
                             left. In this case the proportion of shift is −0.5/π . Now multiply that by
                             a standard cycle length of 2π to give the phase angle of −1. The cycle
                             rate is the number of cycles in unit length given by the reciprocal of the
                             period 1/π ≈ 0.32.
                                We can generalize from these examples to say that for the function
                             y = A cos(ax + b), A positive, we have the following.
                                The amplitude is half the difference between the function values at the
                             peak and the trough of the wave and in case where y = A cos(ax + b) is
                             given by A.

                                                       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
