                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                              Trigonometric functions and waves                97




ww
   w                 .Ea
Figure 5.11

                        syE
              (a) y = cos(5πx + (π/2)); (b) y = 3 cos(2x − 1).




                                                 ngi
                                         The phase is given by the number, b, in the expression A cos(ax + b).
                                      The phase is related to the amount the function A cos(ax + b) is shifted


                                                     n
                                      to the left or right with respect to the function A cos(ax). It expresses the


                                                                   eer
                                      proportion of a standard cycle (maximum 2π ) that the graph has been
                                      shifted by and therefore a phase can always be expressed between 0 and
                                      2π or more often between −π and π. Various phase shifts are given in
                                      Figure 5.12.
                                                                                ing
                                         The cycle rate or frequency is the number of cycles in one unit can be


                                                                                              .ne
                                      found by relating this to the length of the cycle. The longer the cycle the
                                      less cycles there will be in one unit. If the length of one cycle is P (the
                                      fundamental period) then there is 1 cycle in P units and 1/P cycles in
                                      1 unit.
                                                                                                  t
                                         The cycle rate is the reciprocal of the fundamental period. As for the
                                      function y = A cos(ax + b) the fundamental period is P = 2π/a, the
                                      number of cycles is 1/P , that is, a/2π . Examples are given in Figure 5.13.




                                      A wave allows energy to be transferred from one point to another without
5.4 Wave                              any particles of the medium moving between the two points. Water waves
functions of                          move along the surface of a pond in response to a child rhythmically
                                      splashing a hand in the water. The child’s boat floating in the path of the
time and                              wave merely bobs up and down without moving in the direction of the
distance                              wave. See Figure 5.14.
                                        If we look at the position of the boat as the wave passes, it moves
                                      up and down with the height expressed against time giving a sinusoidal
                                      function. This is then a wave function of time and in the expression
                                      y = A cos(ωt + φ), the letter A represents the amplitude, φ represents
                                      the phase, and ω is related to the wave frequency. This is explained in
                                      detail in the next section. If we take a snapshot picture of the surface of

                                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
