                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                              Trigonometric functions and waves              107

                     Example 5.13         Using sin(90◦ ) = 1 and cos(90◦ ) = 0, find sin(45◦ )
                     Solution     Using

                     sin2 (A) = 21 (1 − cos(2A))

                     and putting A = 45◦ , 2A = 90◦ , we get

                     sin2 (45◦ ) = 21 (1 − cos(90◦ )) = 21    (as cos(90◦ ) = 0)
                                             
                        ⇔ sin(45◦ ) = ± 21 .

                        From the knowledge of the graph of the sine function we know that
                     sin(45◦ ) > 0, hence,
                                 
                     sin(45◦ ) = 21 .


ww
5.6
   w     .Ea
Superposition
                     The principle of superposition of waves states that the effect of a number
                     of waves can be found by summing the disturbances that would have
                     been produced by the individual waves separately. This behaviour is quite
                     different from that of travelling particles, which will bump into each other,

            syE      thereby altering the velocity of both.
                        The idea of superposition is used to explain the behaviour of:
                     1.

                     2.          ngi
                           stationary waves formed by two wave trains of the same amplitude
                           and frequency travelling at the same speed in opposite directions.
                           Interference of coherent waves from identical sources.
                     3.

                     4.
                                     n
                           Two wave trains of close frequency travelling at the same speed,
                           causing beats.
                           Diffraction effects.      eer
                                                                 ing
                          We look at some examples of these applications.

                     Standing waves
                                                                              .ne
                                                                                  t
                     Suppose that a wave is created by plucking a string of a musical instru-
                     ment; when the wave reaches the end of the string it is reflected back.
                     The reflected wave will have the same frequency as the initial wave but a
                     different phase and will be travelling in the opposite direction.
                        The sum of the incident and reflected wave forms a standing wave. An
                     example is shown in Figure 5.18. Figure 5.18(a) shows the incident wave
                     in a string at some instant in time. Its phase is 18◦ . Beyond the barrier
                     is shown the hypothetical continuation of the wave as if there were no
                     barrier. The reflected wave is found by turning this section upside down
                     and reflecting it, as shown in Figure 5.18(b). The reflected wave has
                     phase (180◦ − phase of the incident wave) = 180◦ − 18◦ = 162◦ . In
                     Figure 5.18(c), the sum of the incident and reflected wave produces a
                     standing wave. The maximum and minimum values on this are called
                     antinodes and the zero values are called nodes. As the string is fixed at
                     both ends there must be nodes at the ends.
                        At different moments in time, the phase of the incident wave will be
                     different. This changes the amplitude of the standing wave but does not
                     change the position of the nodes or antinodes (for a given frequency of
                     wave). Only waves whose wavelengths exactly divide into 2l (twice the
                     length of the string) can exist on the string because their amplitude must
                     be 0 at the two end points. Each possible wavelength defines a mode of

                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
