                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




      6                Differentiation

6.1 Introduction       We have used functions to express relationships between variables. For
                       instance, in an electrical circuit the current and the voltage through a
                       resistor can be related by V = IR. Here, one physical relationship can


ww                     be found by simply substituting in the formula the known value of the
                       other. Another common relationship between physical quantities is that
                       one quantity is the rate of change of another: for instance, speed is defined


   w      .Ea
                       as rate of change of distance with respect to time. It is simple to find the
                       average speed of a moving object if we know how far it has travelled in a
                       certain length of time, which is given by



             syE       Distance travelled
                          Time taken


                                  ngi
                       This does not give an idea of the speed at any particular instant. If
                       I am travelling by coach from London to Birmingham the journey takes


                                      n
                       about 2.75 h to go about 110 miles. This means that the average speed


                                                     eer
                       is about 40 mph. However, I know that the coach by no means travels at
                       a constant speed. Through central London it travels at around 12 mph
                       and on the motorway at around 70 mph. Is there a way that we can

                                                                  ing
                       estimate the speed at any particular moment as accurately as possible,
                       armed only with a mileometer, to give the distance travelled, and a stop


                                                                               .ne
                       watch? I can measure the distance travelled in a 10 s interval and find
                       that it is 0.2 miles. This means that the average speed is 0.2/10 miles per
                       second = 0.02 miles per second = 0.02 × 60 × 60 mph = 72 mph.

                                                                                   t
                       This gives a pretty good idea of the speed at any moment within that
                       10 s interval, as the length of time is small enough that the speed prob-
                       ably has not changed too much. The smaller the period of time over
                       which we take the measurement, the more accurately we should be
                       able to estimate the speed at any one instant. The speed is found by
                       looking at the ratio of the distance travelled over the time taken where
                       the time interval is taken as small as possible. This is an approxi-
                       mation to the instantaneous rate of change of distance with respect
                       to time.
                          The rate of change of one quantity with respect to another is called
                       its derivative. If we know the expression defining the function then we
                       are able to find its derivative. The techniques used for differentiating are
                       described in this chapter.
                          Many physical quantities are related through differentiation. Some
                       of these are current and charge, acceleration and velocity, force and
                       work done, momentum and force, and power and energy. Applica-
                       tions of differentiation are, therefore, very widespread in all areas of
                       engineering.




                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
