                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




      7                Integration

7.1 Introduction       In Chapter 6, we saw that many physical quantities are related by one
                       being the rate of change, the derivative, of the other. It follows that there
                       must be a way of expressing the ‘inverse’ relationship. This is called
                       integration. Velocity is the rate of change of distance with time, distance

ww                     is the integral of velocity with respect to time.
                          Unfortunately, there are two issues that complicate the simple idea


   w
                       that ‘integration is the inverse of differentiation’. First, we find that there
                       are many different functions which are the integral of the same function.

           .Ea         Luckily, these functions only differ from each other by a constant. To
                       find all the possible integrals of a function we can find any one of them


              syE
                       and add on some constant, called the constant of integration. This type of
                       integral is called the indefinite integral. As it is not satisfactory to have an
                       unknown constant left in the solution to a problem we employ some other


                                   ngi
                       information to find its value. Once the unknown constant is replaced by
                       some value to fit a certain problem, we have the particular integral.
                          The second problem with integration is that most functions cannot be

                                       n
                       integrated exactly, even apparently simple functions like sin(x)/x.

                                                      eer
                          For this reason, numerical methods of integration are particularly
                       important. These methods all depend on understanding the idea of integra-
                       tion as area under the graph. The definite integral of a function, y = f (x),

                                                                    ing
                       is the integral between two values of x and therefore gives a number (not
                       a function of x) as a result. There is no uncertainty, hence it is called the
                       definite integral.
                                                                                  .ne
                          This chapter is concerned with methods of finding the integral, the for-


                       indefinite integrals and at applications of integration.       t
                       mulas that can be used for finding exact integrals and also with numerical
                       integration. We also look more closely at the definitions of definite and




                       Integration is the inverse process to differentiation. Consider the follow-
7.2 Integration        ing examples (where C is a constant):


                                                Function → derivative
                                                Integral ← function

                                                   x2 + C          2x
                                                sin(x) + C       cos(x)


                       The derivative of x 2 + C with respect to x is 2x, therefore, the integral
                       of 2x with respect to x is x 2 + C. This can be written as
                                                 
                        d 2
                          (x + C) = 2x ⇔             2x dx = x 2 + C
                       dx

                                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
