                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




      8                The exponential
                       function

8.1 Introduction       In Example 2.11, we looked at an acoustical absorption problem. We


ww                     found that after a single note on a trombone had been played, the sound
                       intensity decayed according to the expression I = 10−11t . This is a dying
                       exponential function. Many other physical situations involve decay or

   w      .Ea
                       growth in an exponential fashion; for instance, population growth or the
                       decay of charge on a discharging capacitor. The functions y = a t , where
                       a can be any positive number, are called exponential functions. In this
                       chapter, we shall look at how they describe this particular type of growth

             syE       or decay, when the growth or decay is proportional to the current size
                       of the ‘population’, y. This situation can be described by a differential
                       equation of the form dy/dt = ky. The special case where k = 1, giving

                                  ngi
                       the equation dy/dt = y, leads us to define the number e ≈ 2.7182818
                       and the function y = et , which is called the exponential function. The
                       inverse function is y = loge (t), which is also refered to as y = ln(t) and

                                      n              eer
                       called the natural or Napierian logarithm.
                          The function y = et is neither even nor odd; however, it is possible
                       to split any real function into an even part and an odd part and in this

                                                                 ing
                       case we find that this gives the hyperbolic functions. These hyperbolic
                       functions have properties that are surprisingly similar to the properties of


                                                                               .ne
                       the trigonometric functions and hence have similar names, cosh(t), sinh(t)
                       (the hyperbolic sine and hyperbolic cosine) from which we can define
                       also tanh(t), the hyperbolic tangent. We also look at differentiation and

                                                                                   t
                       integration problems involving the exponential and hyperbolic functions.


                       Supposing, following some deed of heroism, the police offered you the
8.2 Exponential        choice of the following rewards:
growth and             (a) Tomorrow you receive 1 c and the following day 2 c and after that
decay                      4 c, then 8 c and each day the amount doubles for the next month.
                       (b) Tomorrow you receive e2, the following day e4 and the day after
                           e6, then e8 so that each day you receive e2 more than the day
                           before. Again you receive payments on every day for the next month.
                       If, although not motivated by personal greed, you wish to receive the
                       highest possible reward (in order, presumably, to donate the amount
                       to charity), which reward should you accept? Option (b) superficially
                       appears to be the best because at least it starts off with enough money
                       to buy a small sandwich. However, a closer look reveals the that if you
                       choose option (a), on the last day (assuming there are 31 days in the month)
                       you receive in excess of e10 000 000 with the total reward exceeding e20
                       million. However, option (b) only reaps e62 on the final day with a total
                       award of only e992.

                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
