       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                   The exponential function            163

               Both options are examples of growth. Option (b) gives a constant
            growth rate of e2. If yn is the amount received on day n, the way that this
            grows could be expressed by yn+1 = yn + 2. This is expressing the fact
            that the amount received on day n+1 is e2 more than the amount received
            on day n. This also means that the change each day in the amount received
            is 2, which can be expressed as yn = 2, where yn = yn+1 − yn and
            represents the change in y from day n to day n + 1.
               Option (a) is an example of exponential growth (or geometric growth).
            The amount received each day is proportional to the amount received the
            day before, in this case twice as much. yn can be expressed by yn+1 = 2yn .
            The change in y is equal to the value of y itself, yn = yn .
               Because of the nature of exponential growth it is unlikely that you
            would be given such an attractive award as option (a) represents. However,
            exponential growth is not beyond the reach of the everyday person as
            savings accounts offer this opportunity. Unfortunately, the amount you
            receive does not increase as quickly as doubling each day but it is based

ww          on how much you have already in the bank; hence, it is exponential.
            Supposing you opened an account that paid an annual interest of 6%
            and the annual rate of inflation was 3%, then the real rate of growth is

   w.Ea
            approximately 3% per annum. If yn is the value of the amount you have
            in the bank after n years then yn+1 = 1.03yn . We can also express this by
            saying that the interest received each year, that is, the change in yn , yn ,
            is 3% of yn , that is, yn = 0.03yn , where yn = yn+1 − yn . If the rate

       syE  of interest remains constant then if you deposit e1 tomorrow then your
            descendents, in only 500 years time, will receive an amount worth over
            e2.5 million in real terms.

                       ngi
               The models of growth that we have discussed so far give examples of
            recurrence relations, also called difference equations. Their solutions are


                           n
            not difficult to find. For instance, if yn+1 = 2yn and we know that on day 1


                                            eer
            we received 1 c, that is, y1 = 0.01 then we can substitute n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
            (as we did in Section 1.4) to find values of the function giving

            0.01, 0.02, 0.04, 0.08, 0.16, 0.32, . . .
                                                        ing
                                                                      .ne
            Clearly, there is a power of 2 involved in the expression for yn , so we
            can guess that y = 0.01 (2n−1 ). By checking a few values of n we

                                                                          t
            can confirm that this is indeed the amount received each day. When we
            deposit e1 in the bank at a real rate of growth of 3% we get the recur-
            rence relation yn+1 = 1.03yn , where yn is the current day value of the
            amount in the savings account after n years. Substituting a few values
            beginning with y0 = 1 (the amount we initially deposit) we then get
            1, 1.03, 1.06, 1.09, 1.13, 1.16, 1.19, . . . (to the nearest cent). Each time we
            multiply the amount by 1.03, there must be a power of 1.03 in the solution
            for y. We can guess the solution as yn = (1.03)n . By checking a few val-
            ues of n we can confirm that this is, in fact, the amount in the bank after
            n years.
               The models we have looked at so far are discrete models. In the case
            of the money in the bank the increase occurs at the end of each year.
            However, if we consider population growth, for instance, then it is not
            possible to say that the population grows at the end of a certain period, the
            growth could happen at any moment of time. In this case, providing the
            population is large enough, it is easier to model the situation continuously,
            using a differential equation. Such models take the form of dy/dt = ky.
            dy/dt is the rate of growth, if k is positive, or the rate of decay, if k
            is negative. The equation states that the rate of growth or decay of a
            population of size y is proportional to the size of the population.

                                        Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
