                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


164   The exponential function

                                 Example 8.1 A malfunctioning fridge maintains a temperature of 6◦ C
                                 which allows a population of bacteria to reproduce such that, on average,
                                 each bacteria divides every 20 min. Assuming no bacteria die in the time
                                 under consideration find a differential equation to describe the population
                                 growth.
                                 Solution If the population at time t is given by p then the rate of change
                                 of the population is dp/dt. The increase in the population is such that it
                                 approximately doubles every 20 min, that is, it increases by p in 20×60 s.
                                 That gives a rate of increase as p/(20 × 60) per second. Hence, the
                                 differential equation describing the population is
                                 dp    p
                                    =      .
                                 dt   1200




ww                               Example 8.2 A capacitor, in an RC circuit, has been charged to
                                 a charge of Q0 . The voltage source has been removed and the
                                 circuit closed as in Figure 8.1. Find a differential equation that

   w               .Ea
Figure 8.1 A closed RC
circuit.
                                 describes the rate of discharge of the capacitor if C = 0.001 µF and
                                 R = 10 M.
                                 Solution The voltage across a capacitor is given by Q/C where C is the
                                 capacitance and Q is the charge on the capacitor. The voltage across

                      syE        the resistor is given by Ohm’s Law as IR. From Kirchoff’s voltage law,
                                 the sum of the voltage drops in the circuit must be 0; therefore, as the
                                 circuit is closed, we get voltage across the resistor + voltage across the

                                        Q
                                            ngi
                                 capacitor = 0:

                                 ⇒ IR +
                                        C
                                          = 0.
                                                n             eer
                                 By definition, the current is the rate of change of charge with respect to


                                 R
                                     dQ Q                                  ing
                                 time, that is I = dQ/dt giving the differential equation

                                        +   = 0.
                                     dt   C
                                 We can rearrange this equation as                      .ne
                                 R
                                     dQ
                                     dt
                                        =−
                                           Q
                                           C
                                             ⇔
                                               dQ
                                               dt
                                                  =−
                                                     Q
                                                     RC
                                                        .                                   t
                                 We can see that this is an equation for exponential decay. The rate of
                                 change of the charge on the capacitor is proportional to the remain-
                                 ing charge at any point in time with a constant of proportionality
                                 given by 1/RC. In this case as R = 10 M and C = 0.001 µF,
                                 we get
                                 dQ
                                    = −100Q.
                                 dt


                                 Example 8.3 Radioactivity is the emission of α- or β-particles and
                                 γ -rays due to the disintegration of the nuclei of atoms. The rate of dis-
                                 integration is proportional to the number of atoms at any point in time
                                 and the constant of proportionality is called the radioactivity decay con-
                                 stant. The radioactive decay constant for Radium B is approximately
                                 4.3 × 10−4 s−1 . Give a differential equation that describes the decay of
                                 the number of particles N in a piece of Radium B.

                                                           Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
