                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




              9                        Vectors

                                       Many things can be represented by a simple number, for instance, time,
9.1 Introduction                       distance, mass, which are then called scalar quantities. Others, however,
                                       are better represented by both their size, or magnitude, and a direction.
                                       Some of these are velocity, acceleration, and force. These quantities are

 ww                                    called vector quantities because they are represented by vectors.
                                          A simple example of a vector is one that describes displacement. Sup-
                                       posing someone is standing in a room with floor tiles (as in Figure 9.1)

    w                  .Ea
                                       and moving from one position to another can be described by the number
                                       of tiles to the right and the number of tiles towards the top of the page.
                                          In the example, to move from the door to the cupboard can be repre-
                                       sented by (4, 2). This vector consists of two numbers, where the order

                          syE          of the numbers is important. Moving (4, 2) results in a different final
                                       position to that if we move (2, 4). The magnitude of the displacement can
                                       be found by drawing a straight line from the starting position to the final

                                                  ngi
                                       position and
                                                  √ measuring√the length. From Pythagoras theorem this can be
                                       found as 42 + 22 = 20 ≈ 4.47. The direction can be described by an


                                                      n
                                       angle, for instance, the angle made to the wall with the window on it.


                                                                     eer
                                          This example shows that a two-dimensional vector (2D) can be used
                                       to represent movement on a flat surface. A 2D vector is two numbers,


                                                                                  ing
                                       where the order of the numbers is important.
                                          If the room in Figure 9.1 also had wall tiles then we could represent a
                                       position above the floor by the number of tiles towards the ceiling. This


                                                                                               .ne
                                       three-dimensional (3D) vector can be represented by three numbers. It
                                       can also be represented by the distance travelled and the direction, angles
                                       made to the floor and the angle made to the wall.

                                                                                                   t
                                          Velocity is an example of a vector quantity. This can be described by
                                       two things, the speed, which is the rate of change of distance travelled with
                                       respect to time, and also the direction in which it is travelling. Similarly,
                                       force can be described by the size of magnitude of the force and also the
                                       direction in which it operates.
                                          Vectors have their own rules for addition and subtraction. If two forces
                                       of equal magnitude operate on one object then the net effect will depend
                                       on the direction of the forces. If the forces operate in opposite directions




Figure 9.1 A tiled room.
To reach the cupboard from
the door we need to move four
tiles to the right and two tiles
towards the top of the page.
This can be represented by
the vector (4, 2).


                                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
