                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


190    Vectors




                                       Figure 9.4 (a) A two-dimensional rectangular set of axes and the
                                       vector (1, 5). The axes are at right angles and the numbers in the
                                       vector give the x, y translation it represents. (b) A three-dimensional
                                       rectangular set of axes and the vector (2, 3, 1). The axes are at right
                                       angles and the numbers in the vector correspond to the x, y, z
                                       translation it represents.




 ww
    w                   .Ea
                           syE
                                                  ngi                                       −→
                                       Figure 9.5 (a) The position vector p = (2, 3) or OP = (2, 3) is used
                                       to represent a point in the plane. The point can be found by

                                                      n
                                       translating from the origin by 2 in the x-direction followed by 3 in the


                                                                     eer
                                       y-direction; hence, p = (2, 3). (b) The position vector p = (2, 3, 4) is
                                       used to represent a point in space. The point can be found by
                                       translating from the origin by 2 in the x-direction, followed by 3 in the

                                                                                  ing
                                       y-direction, and by 4 in the z-direction; hence, p = (2, 3, 4).



Figure 9.6 (a) The vector                                                                       .ne
                                       This means that the numbers in the vectors correspond to the x, y, z values
t = (2, 3) is used to represent
a translation of the figure
ABCD. Each of the points
defining the figure have been
translated by (2,3).
                                                                                                    t
                                       for a set of rectangular axes, as shown in Figure 9.4. This assumption is
                                       important for many of the geometrical interpretations presented here.


                                       Position vectors and
                                       translation vectors
                                       Vectors can represent points in a plane, as in Figure 9.5(a), or points in
                                       space, as in Figure 9.5(b). These are called position vectors. They can be
                                       thought of as representing a translation from the origin.
                                         Vectors can represent a translation that can be applied to figures. In
                                       Figure 9.6, a four-sided figure ABCD has been translated through the
Figure 9.7 The object is               vector (2, 3).
being pulled up the slope
using a force F which has a
direction parallel with the
slope of the hill. There is also       Vector quantities
a force due to gravity Fg
acting vertically downwards            Vectors can represent physical quantities that have both a magnitude and
and a force at right angles to
                                       a direction. In Figure 9.7, there is an example of the forces acting on a
the plane, FN .
                                       body that is being pulled up a slope. By using vectors and vector addition

                                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
