                              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




           10                     Complex numbers

10.1                              In the previous chapter, we have shown that a single frequency wave
                                  can be represented by a phasor. We begin this chapter with a brief look
Introduction                      at linear system theory. Such systems, when the input is a single fre-


 ww                               quency wave, produce an output at the same frequency which may be
                                  phase shifted with a scaled amplitude. Using complex numbers the sys-
                                  tem can be represented by a number which multiplies the input phasor


    w                 .Ea
                                  having the effect of rotating the phasor and scaling the amplitude. We can
                                  define j as the number which rotates the phasor by π/2 without changing
                                  the amplitude. If this multiplication is repeated, hence rotating the phasor
                                  by (π/2) + (π/2) = π , then the system output will be inverted. In this


                         syE      way we can get the fundamental definition j2 = −1. j is clearly not a real
                                  number as any real number squared is positive. j is called an imaginary
                                  number.


                                             ngi
                                     The introduction of imaginary numbers allows any quadratic equa-
                                  tion to be solved. In previous chapters we said that the equation
                                  ax 2 + bx + c = 0 had no solutions when the formula leads to an attempt

                                                 n
                                  to take the square root of a negative number. The introduction of the num-

                                                                eer
                                  ber j makes square roots of negative numbers possible and in these cases
                                  the equation has complex roots. A complex number, z, has a real and


                                                                            ing
                                  imaginary part, z = x + jy where x is the real part and y is the imaginary
                                  part. Real numbers are represented by points on a number line. Complex
                                  numbers need a whole plane to represent them.

                                                                                          .ne
                                     We shall look at operations involving complex numbers, the conversion
                                  between polar and Cartesian (rectangular) form and the application of
                                  complex numbers to alternating current theory.
                                                                                              t
                                     By looking at the problem of motion in a circle, we show the equiv-
                                  alence between polar and exponential form of complex numbers and
                                  represent a wave in complex exponential form. We can also obtain for-
                                  mulae for the sine and cosine in terms of complex exponentials, and we
                                  solve complex equations zn = c, where c is a complex number.



                                  In system theory, a system is represented (Figure 10.1) as a box with
10.2 Phasor                       an input and an output. We think about the system after it has been in
rotation by π/2                   operation for a length of time, so any initial switching effects have
                                  disappeared.
                                     Of particular importance are systems which, when the input is a single
                                  frequency wave, produce an output, at the same frequency that can be
                                  characterized by a phase shift and a change of amplitude of the wave.
                                  Examples of such systems are electrical circuits which are made up of
                                  lumped elements, that is, resistors, capacitors, and inductors. Here the
Figure 10.1 A system is           input and output are voltages. Such a system is shown in Figure 10.2(a).
characterized by a box with       Equivalent mechanical systems are made up of masses, springs and
an input and output.              dampers, and the input and output is the external force applied and the

                                                             Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
