                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                              Complex numbers           207




  Figure 10.2 (a) An electrical
  system made up of resistors,

wwcapacitors, and inductors with
  voltage as input and output.
  (b) A mechanical system
                                      Figure 10.3 (a) A system which produces a phase shift
                                      of π/2, that is, rotates a phasor by π/2. This may be


   w
  made up of masses, springs,
  and dampers. The input is the

                 .Ea
  external force and the output
  is tension in the spring.
                                      represented as a multiplication by j. (b) A system
                                      consisting of two sub-systems, both of which produce a
                                      phase shift of π/2 giving a combined shift of π. As a phase
                                      shift of π inverts a wave, that is, cos(ωt + π) = − cos(ωt )
                                      this is equivalent to multiplication by −1. Hence, j × j = −1.


                    syE
                                             ngi
                                   tension in the spring. An example of such a mechanical system is shown
                                   in Figure 10.2(b).


                                                 n
                                      We saw in Chapter 9 that a single frequency wave can be characterized


                                                               eer
                                   by its amplitude and phase and these can be represented by vectors, called
                                   phasors. The advantage of complex numbers is that a phasor can be


                                                                            ing
                                   treated as a number and the system can be represented also by a number
                                   multiplying the input phasor.
                                      Consider a single frequency input of 0 phase and amplitude 1. If there

                                                                                         .ne
                                   is a system which has the effect of simply shifting the phase by π/2,
                                   then we represent this by the imaginary number j. So j × 1∠0 = 1∠π/2.


                                                                                             t
                                   This system is shown in Figure 10.3(a). Supposing now we consider a
                                   system which can be broken into two components both of which shift the
                                   phase by π2 as shown in Figure 10.3(b). The combined effect of the two
                                   systems is to multiply the input by j × j. The final output wave, shifted
                                   now by π, is the cos(ωt + π ) = − cos(ωt) so it is −1 times the initial
                                   input. For this to be so then j × j = −1.
                                      This is the central definition for complex numbers:

                                   j × j = −1
                                                     √
                                   meaning that j = −1, where j is an operator which rotates a phasor
                                   by π/2.
                                     We will return to these linear time-invariant systems in Chapter 16.


                                   Complex numbers allow us to find solutions to all quadratic equations.
10.3 Complex                       Equations like x 2 + 4 = 0 do not have real roots because
numbers and
                                   x 2 + 4 = 0 ⇔ x 2 = −4
operations
                                   and there is no real number, which if squared will give −4.

                                                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
