                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     11                Maxima and
                       minima and
                       sketching
                       functions
ww
   w
11.1      .Ea          Differentiation can be used to examine the behaviour of a function and find
                       regions where it is increasing or decreasing, and where it has maximum
Introduction
             syE       and minimum values. For instance, we may be interested in finding the
                       maximum height, maximum power, or generating the maximum profit, or
                       in finding ways to use the minimum amount of energy or minimum use of

                                  ngi
                       materials. Maximum and minimum points can also help in the process of
                       sketching a function.


                                      n              eer
11.2 Stationary
points, local                                                     ing
                       Example 11.1 Throw a stone in the air and initially it will have a positive
                       velocity as the height, s, increases; that is, ds/dt > 0. At some point it
                       will start to fall back to the ground, the distance from the ground is then
maxima and                                                                      .ne
                       decreasing, and the velocity is negative, ds/dt < 0. In order to go from
                       a positive velocity to a negative velocity there must be a turning point,
minima
                                                                                    t
                       where the stone is at its maximum height and the velocity is zero. If the
                       stone has initial velocity 20 ms−1 , how can we find the maximum height
                       that it reaches?
                          In order to express the velocity of the stone we can make the assumption
                       that air resistance is negligible and use the relationship between distance
                       and time for motion under constant acceleration, giving
                       s = ut + 21 at 2
                       where s is the distance travelled, u the initial velocity, t is time, and a the
                       acceleration. In this case, u = 20 ms−1 and a = −g (acceleration due to
                       gravity ≈ 10 ms−2 ), so s = 20t − 5t 2 .
                          At the maximum height, the rate of change of distance with time
                       must be 0, that is, the velocity is 0. Therefore, we differentiate to find
                       the velocity:
                            ds
                       v=      = 20 − 10t
                            dt
                       Putting v = 0 gives
                       0 = 20 − 10t ⇔ 10t = 20 ⇔ t = 2

                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
