                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


238    Maxima and minima and sketching functions

                                      We have shown that the maximum height is reached after 2 s. But what
                                      is that height? Substituting t = 2 into the equation for s gives


                                      s = 20(2) − 5(2)2 = 20 m


                                      giving the maximum value of s as 20 m.
                                        This example illustrates the important step in finding maximum and
                                      minimum values of a function, y = f (x). That is, we differentiate and
                                      solve

                                      dy
                                         =0
                                      dx

                                      This may give various values of x. The points where dy/dx = 0 are

 ww                                   called the stationary points but having found these we still need a way
                                      of deciding whether they could be maximum or minimum values. In the


    w                  .Ea
                                      example, we knew that a stone thrown into the air must reach a maximum
                                      height and then return to the ground, and so by solving ds/dt = 0 we
                                      would find the time at the maximum. Other problems may not be so clear
                                      cut and thus we need a method of distinguishing between different types


                          syE         of stationary points.
                                         A stationary point is classified as either a local maximum, a local
                                      minimum, or a point of inflexion. The plural of maximum is maxima


                                                 ngi
                                      and the plural of minimum is minima. The word ‘local’ is used in the
                                      description, because local maxima or local minima do not necessarily give
                                      the overall maximum or minimum values of the function. For instance,

                                                     n
                                      in Figure 11.1 there is a local maximum at B, but the value of y at x = x1

                                                                   eer
                                      is actually bigger; hence, the overall maximum value of the function in
                                      the range is given by y at x1 .


                                                                               ing
                                         To see how to classify stationary points, examine Figure 11.1, where
                                      points A, B, and C are all stationary points.
                                         In order to analyse the slope of the function, imagine the function as

                                      from left to right.                                   .ne
                                      representing the cross-section of a mountain range and we are crossing it



                                      curve is zero, that is, dy/dx = 0.                        t
                                      At points A, B, and C in Figure 11.1, the gradient of the tangent to the

                                      At A there is a local minimum, where the graph changes from going
                                      downhill to going uphill.
                                      At B there is a local maximum, where the graph changes from going
                                      uphill to going downhill.




Figure 11.1 A graph of
some function y = f (x )
plotted from x = x1 to x = x2 .
Points A, B, and C in the
graph are stationary points.
They are points where the
gradient of the tangent to the
curve is zero, that is,
dy/dx = 0.


                                                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
