       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                      Maxima and minima and sketching functions                     245

              Here are some of the important features. The list is not exhaustive but
            should be enough to enable someone to reproduce the graph:
             1. The graph is positive for x < −2 and x > 3 and negative for x
                between −2 and +3. There are no values of x for which y is zero
                and when x = 0, y = −0.167.
             2. The graph is discontinuous at x = −2 and x = 3. y keeps getting
                larger as x approaches −2 from the left. A more precise way of
                expressing this is to say that as x tends to −2, with x less than −2,
                y tends to infinity. The symbol for infinity is ∞ and the symbol for
                ‘tends to’ is →. x tends to −2, with x less than −2 can be expressed
                more briefly as x → 2− . This gives

                  as x → −2− , y → ∞.

                  Similarly

ww                as x → −2+ , y → −∞.


   w.Ea
                  For the discontinuity at x = 3 we have:

                  as x → 3− ,       y → −∞


       syE
                              +
                  as x → 3 ,        y→∞

             3. There is a local maximum at x = 0.5, where y = −0.16.

                       ngi
             4. For large values of x, y gets nearer to 0. This can be expressed as

                  as x → ∞, y → 0+

                           n
                  Similarly:
                                            eer
                  as x → −∞, y → 0         +

                                                        ing
            in order to sketch a graph:
                                                                       .ne
               This list of important features indicates the steps that should be taken

            Step 1.


            Step 2.
                                                                           t
                      Find the value of y when the graph crosses the y-axis; that is,
                      when x = 0. If possible find where the graph crosses the x-axis;
                      that is, the values of x where y = 0.
                      Find any discontinuities in the function, that is, are there values
                      of x where there is no value of y? Infinite discontinuities (a
                      ‘divide by zero’) will lead to vertical asymptotes. These are
                      vertical lines which the function approaches but does not meet.
                      We must decide whether the function is positive or negative on
                      either side of the asymptote.
            Step 3.   Find the co-ordinates of the maxima and minima.
            Step 4.   Find the behaviour of the function as x tends to plus and minus
                      infinity.
            Step 5.   Mark these features, found from steps 1 to 4 on the graph and
                      join them, where appropriate, to give the sketch of the graph.


            Example 11.6          Sketch the curve whose equation is

                      2x + 1
            y=
                  (x + 1)(x − 5)

                                         Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
