                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                      Maxima and minima and sketching functions                            253

11.5. Find the overall maximum and minimum value of
      y = x 3 (x − 1) in the range x ∈ [0, 2].

11.6. An open box of variable height and width is to have
      a length of 3 m. It should not use more than a total of
      20 m2 of surface area. Find the height and width that
      gives maximum volume.
                                                                      Figure 11.11 Crank used to drive a piston
11.7. An LRC series circuit has an impedance of magnitude             (Exercise 11.8).

           
                                 2                             11.9. A water wheel is constructed with symmetrical curved
                           1                                          vanes of angle of curvature θ. Assuming that friction
      Z=     R2 +    ωL −
                          ωC                                          can be taken as negligible, the efficiency, η, that is, the
                                                                      ratio of output power to input power, is calculated as
      where R is the resistance, L the inductance, C the                    2(V − v)(1 + cos(θ))v
      capacitance and ω is the angular frequency of the volt-         η=
                                                                                     V2

ww    age source. Sketch Z against ω for the case where
      R = 200 , C = 0.03 µF, L = 2 mH.                                where V is the velocity of the jet of water as it strikes
                                                                      the vane, v is the velocity of the vane in the direc-


   w
11.8. A crank is used to drive a piston as in Figure 11.11.
      The angular velocity of the crank shaft is the rate of

                        .Ea
      change of the angle θ , ω = dθ/dt. The piston moves
      horizontally with velocity vp and acceleration ap . The
      crankpin performs circular motion with a velocity of vc
                                                                      tion of the jet, and θ is constant. Find the ratio v/V
                                                                      that gives maximum efficiency and find the maximum
                                                                      efficiency.
                                                                11.10. Power is transmitted by a fluid of density ρ moving


                           syE
      and centripetal acceleration of ω2 r. The acceleration
      ap of the piston varies with θ and is related by
                                                                      with positive velocity V along a pipeline of con-
                                                                      stant cross-section area A. Assuming that the loss
                                                                      of power is mainly attributable to friction and that
               
      ap = ω2 r cos(θ) +
                         r cos(2θ )
                             l
                                                       ngi            the friction coefficient f can be taken to be a con-
                                                                      stant, then the power transmitted is given by P ,
                                                                      P = ρgA(hV − cV 3 ), where, g is acceleration due to



      of the connecting rod. Substituting r = 150 mm and
                                                           n
      where r is the length of the crank and l is the length
                                                                      gravity and h is the head (the energy per unit weight).


                                                                           eer
                                                                      c = 4f l/2gd where l is the length of the pipe and d
                                                                      is the diameter of the pipe. Assuming h is a constant
                                                                      find the value of V which gives a maximum value for
      l = 375 mm find the maximum and minimum values
      of the acceleration ap .                                                           ing
                                                                      P , and given the input power is Pi = ρgAV h, find
                                                                      the maximum efficiency.


                                                                                                         .ne
                                                                                                             t




                                                                       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
