                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     12              Sequences and
                     series

12.1
ww
Introduction
                     Sequences have two main applications: serving as a digital representation
                     of a signal after analog to digital (A/D) conversion or as a method of
                     solving a numerical problem by getting a sequence of answers, each one


   w      .Ea
                     being closer to the exact, correct solution.
                        The advance of digital communications has resulted from the increased
                     accuracy in reproduction of the stored or transmitted signal in digital form.
                     For instance, the reproduction of the stored signal by a compact disc player


             syE     is far superior to the analog reproduction of the old vinyl records. It is also
                     very convenient to be able to apply filters and other processing techniques
                     in digital form using computers or dedicated microprocessors.


                                   ngi
                        Sequences are often defined in the form of a recurrence relation, special
                     sorts of which are also called difference equations. Recurrence relations
                     can be found which will solve certain problems numerically or they may

                                       n
                     be derived by modelling the physical processes in a digital system.

                                                    eer
                        The sum of a sequence of terms is called a series. An important example
                     of a series is the Taylor series which can be used to approximate a function.

                     transforms and Fourier series.
                                                                 ing
                     Later in the book, we will look at other examples of series such as z

                        Many problems involving sequences and series are solved using a com-

                                                                               .ne
                     puter. However, it is useful to be able to solve a few simple cases without
                     the aid of a computer, as this can often help check a result for some special

                     and the geometric progression.
                                                                                   t
                     cases. Some examples of special sequences are the arithmetic progression



                     A sequence is a collection of objects (not necessarily all different)
12.2 Sequences       arranged in a definite order. Some examples of sequences are:
and series           1.   The numbers 1 to 10, that is, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
definitions          2.   Red, Red and Amber, Green, Amber, Red
                     3.   3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18.
                        When a sequence follows some ‘obvious’ rule then three dots (. . .) are
                     used to indicate ‘and so on’, for example, list 1 above may be rewritten as
                     1, 2, 3, . . . , 10.
                        The examples so far have all been finite sequences. Infinite sequences
                     may use dots at the end, meaning carry on indefinitely in the same fashion,
                     for example,
                     2, 4, 6, 8, 10, . . .
                     1, 2, 4, 8, 16, . . .
                     4, 9, 16, 25, 36, . . .
                     1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, . . .

                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
