               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                              Sequences and series              287

                    that

                    |xn+1 − xn | < 0.00005|xn+1 |

                    and take xn+1 as the limit of the sequence correct to four significant
                    figures.


                    Divergence
                    A divergent sequence is one that does not tend to a finite limit. Some
                    examples of divergent sequences are:
                      (i) 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0 . . . which is an oscillating sequence,
                     (ii) 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 . . . which tends to plus infinity,
                    (iii) −1, −3, −5, . . . which tends to minus infinity.


ww                     Recurrence relations that are used for some numerical method may not
                    always converge, particularly if the initial value is chosen inappropriately.
                    To check for this eventuality, it is usual to stop the algorithm after some


   w    .Ea
                    finite number of steps, maybe 100 or 1000 iterations, depending on the
                    problem. If no convergence has been found after that number of iterations
                    then it is considered that sequence is failing to converge.



           syE
12.9 Summary         1. A sequence is a collection of objects arranged in a definite order. The
                        elements of a sequence can be represented by a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . , an , . . .

                                  ngi
                     2. If a rule exists by which any term in the sequence can be found
                        then this may be used to express the general term of the sequence,


                                      n
                        usually represented by an or a(n). This rule can also be expressed in


                                                   eer
                        the form of a recurrence relation where an+1 is expressed in terms
                        of an , an−1 , an−2 , . . .


                                                                 ing
                     3. During analog to digital (A/D) conversion, a signal is sampled and
                        can then be represented by a sequence of numbers. f (t) can be
                        represented by a(n) = f (nT ), where T is the sampling interval


                        represent a frequency of f Hz.                           .ne
                        and t = nT . The sampling theorem states that the sampling inter-
                        val must be less than T = 1/(2f ) seconds in order to be able to



                        the summation process, for example,
                                                                                     t
                     4. A series is the sum of a sequence. To represent series we may use
                        sigma notation, using the capital Greek letter sigma, , to indicate


                           n=10
                                 1
                                  2n
                           n=0

                        means ‘sum all the terms 1/2n for n from 0 to 10’.
                     5. An arithmetic progression (AP) is a sequence where each term is
                        found by adding a fixed amount, called the common difference, to
                        the previous term. If the first term is a and the common difference
                        is d, then the general term is an = a + (n − 1)d and the sum of the
                        first n terms is given by
                                  n                                  n
                           Sn =     (2a + (n − 1)d)     or    Sn =     (a + l)
                                  2                                  2
                           where l is the last term in the sequence and n is the number of terms.
                     6.    An geometric progression (GP) is a sequence where each term is
                           found by multiplying the previous term by a fixed amount, called

                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
