                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     13              Systems of linear
                     equations,
                     matrices, and
                     determinants
ww
   w      .Ea
13.1         syE     The widespread use of computers to solve engineering problems means
                     that it is important to be able to represent problems in a form suitable for
Introduction
                               ngi
                     solution by a computer. Matrices are used to represent: systems of lin-
                     ear equations; transformations used in computer graphics or for robotic


                                   n
                     control; road, electrical and communication networks, and stresses and


                                                  eer
                     strains in materials. A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers of dimen-
                     sion m×n where m is the number of rows and n is the number of columns
                     in the matrix. Matrices are also useful because they enable us to consider

                                                               ing
                     an array of numbers as a single object, represent it by a single symbol,
                     and manipulate these symbols conveniently. In this chapter, we look at


                                                                            .ne
                     applications of matrices and arithmetic operations on matrices and some
                     common numerical methods. We shall also look at the problem of solv-
                     ing systems of linear equations. The methods of solving linear systems

                                                                                t
                     of equations are well understood and we only need to be able to solve
                     simple cases of such problems ‘by hand’. However, it is important to
                     be able to express a problem in matrix form and also appreciate situa-
                     tions where no solution exists or where more than one solution exists.
                     This allows to analyse the problems of ill-conditioning of systems of
                     equations, which can lead to instability in the solution and the problem of
                     over- or under-determinacy, where either we have too much information,
                     leading to possibly contradictory conditions, or we have not got enough
                     to produce a single set of solutions for the unknowns.
                        We shall also look at the eigenvalue problem. The technique of finding
                     eigenvalues will become particularly important when applied to systems
                     of differential equations which we meet in Chapter 14.




                     A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers. They may also be used as a
13.2 Matrices        simple store of information as in the following example.
                       Every weekday a household orders pints of milk, loaves of bread, and
                     yoghurt from a milk lorry. The orders for the week can be displayed

                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
