                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


306   Systems of linear equations, matrices, and determinants

                              Example 13.12 Given that A, B, and C are matrices and AB = C where
                              A and B are non-singular, find expressions for B and A.
                              Solution In this case, we are told that A and B are invertible, so they
                              must be square and therefore C must also be square and of the same
                              dimension. To find B we wish to ‘get rid’ of the A term on the left-hand
                              side. We pre-multiply both sides of the equation by A−1
                                 AB = C and given A is invertible
                              ⇔     A−1 AB = A−1 C.
                              Now using A−1 A = I, the unit matrix, we have
                              IB = A−1 C.
                              As the unit matrix multiplied by any matrix leaves it unchanged, we have
                              ⇔     B = A−1 C.


ww                            To find an expression for A, use
                              AB = C


   w              .Ea
                              given that B is invertible, we post-multiply by B−1
                              ⇔     ABB−1 = CB−1 .
                              Now using BB−1 = I, the unit matrix, we have

                     syE      AI = CB−1 .



                                          ngi
                              As the unit matrix multiplied by any matrix leaves it unchanged, we have
                              ⇔     A = CB−1 .


                                              n             eer
                                Remember that it is always important to specify whether you are
                              pre- or post-multiplying when solving matrix equations. A term like

                              would do with numbers.                     ing
                              B−1 AB cannot be simplified because we cannot swap the order, as we




13.3                                                                                   .ne
                                                                                           t
                              On a computer graphics screen an object is represented by a set of coor-
                              dinates, either with reference to the screen origin or with reference to
Transformations               the origin of some window created by the graphical user interface (GUI).
                              We may wish to move the object around inside its window. We shall
                              consider in this section only two-dimensional objects as dealing with
                              three-dimensional objects would add the complication of needing to rep-
                              resent a perspective view. Ideas about transformations are also important
                              when considering movement of a robotic arm.
                                 There are three ways of moving an object without affecting its overall
                              size or shape: rotation, reflection and translation. We could also stretch it
                              or compress it in some direction – the operation of scaling.
                                 We shall look at how to perform these operations using matrices and
                              vectors. We can check that the operations performed are those that we
                              expected by looking at the effect on some simple shapes. In most of these
                              examples, we look at the effect of a unit square at the origin, defined by the
                              points A (0,0), B(1,0), C (1,1), D (0,1). The outcome of the transformation
                              is called the image which we will represent by the points A , B , C , D .
                              The transformation, T, is a function whose domain and codomain is the
                              plane (which is referred to as R2 ). The term ‘mapping’ is also used in this
                              context. It has exactly the same meaning as function, but is more often
                              used when referring to geometrical problems.

                                                         Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
