                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


322   Systems of linear equations, matrices, and determinants

                              vector of constant terms are non-zero, then this shows that the system is
                              inconsistent and there are no solutions.
                                 We can summarize the results of this section as follows. For a system
                              of equations (assuming we have as many equations as unknowns) there
                              are three possibilities
                              Case 1: A determined system has a unique solution which can be found
                              by using elimination. Geometrically, the solution is a single point which
                              (in the case a a system in two unknowns) represents the intersection of
                              the two lines. The determinant of the coefficients is non-zero. The system
                              is both consistent and determined.
                              Case 2: An undetermined system has many solutions. If elimination
                              is used to solve the system it will result in a condition like 0 = 0,
                              which is always true. Geometrically the solutions lie (for a system in
                              two unknowns) anywhere along a line. The determinant of the coeffi-
                              cients is zero, as are any determinants found by replacing a column in

ww                            the matrix of coefficients by the vector of constant terms. The system is
                              undetermined but consistent (as there are solutions).


   w
                              Case 3: An inconsistent system has no solutions. If elimination is used
                              to solve the system it will result in a condition like 0 = 3, which is

                  .Ea         always false. Geometrically, for a system in two unknowns, the system is
                              represented by parallel lines which have no points in common, hence no


                     syE
                              solutions. The determinant of the coefficients is zero but at least one of
                              the determinants found by replacing a column in the matrix of coefficients
                              by the vector of constant terms is non-zero. The system is inconsistent.


                                          ngi
                                 For Case 1, the solution of the system can be found by using the inverse
                              of the matrix of coefficients. We can represent the system by

                              Av = b.
                                              n            eer
                              A−1 Av = A−1 b                            ing
                              As the determinant of A is non-zero, we know that A has an inverse
                              A−1 . We pre-multiply both sides of the matrix equation by A−1 giving


                              as A−1 A = I, the unit matrix and Iv = v                .ne
                              we get

                                v = A−1 b
                                                                                          t
                              Av = b ∧ |A| = 0 ⇔ v = A−1 b.



                              Example 13.24      Solve

                              3x + 4y = 7
                               x + 2y = 2

                              by finding the inverse of the matrix of coefficients.
                              Solution The system can be expressed as
                                          
                                3   4     x   7
                                            =    .
                                1   2     y   2


                                                         Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
