       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


            Systems of linear equations, matrices, and determinants                     329
                                             40        16            24
            Check: To check, substitute I1 =    , I2 =    , and I3 =    into the
                                             41        41            41
            original equations

            I1 − I2 − I3 = 0
            3I2 − 2I3 = 0
            7I1 + 2I3 = 8

            giving

            40 16 24
               −  −    = 0, which is true
            41 41 41
                    
               16     24
            3     −2      = 0, which is true
               41     41

ww          7
               
               40
               41
                  +2
                      
                      24
                      41
                          = 8, which is true.


   w.Ea     Indeterminacy and inconsistency
       syE  When we analysed systems of equations in Section 13.5, we saw that one
            of the equations reducing to 0 = 0, indicates that we have an indetermi-

                       ngi
            nate system; that is that there will be many solutions. If, in the process of
            performing Gauss elimination, we find a row of zeros then we know that


                           n
            we have an indeterminate system. We can use the remaining equations to


                                         eer
            eliminate as many of the unknowns as possible, giving a solution which
            will still involve one or more of the variables. This will give a whole line
            or possibly (in three dimensions) a plane of solutions.

                                                      ing
               If we come across a row that is zero everywhere in the matrix of coeffi-
            cients but has a non-zero constant term we have found an equation 0 = c,


                                                                    .ne
            which is false. This is an inconsistent system and has no solutions.


            Order of the equations
                                                                        t
            At the beginning of each stage in Gauss elimination, the order of the
            rows may be swapped (other than those already used in previous stages
            as the pivotal equation). We will have to swap the equations if the next
            ‘pivotal’ equation has a zero coefficient for the next variable to be elim-
            inated. It is usual, although we have not illustrated this point, to always
            consider swapping the order of the equations, in order to choose the
            equation with the largest absolute value of the coefficient in the term to
            be used for eliminating, as the pivotal equation. This is called partial piv-
            oting. This procedure as an attempt to avoid problems with equations that
            may become ill conditioned in the course if performing the elimination.
            The equations are ill conditioned when a small change in the coefficients
            of the equations causes a large change in the values of the solutions, and
            in such equations rounding errors can become large and cause significant
            inaccuracies in the solutions. We have not performed partial pivoting in
            these examples as they are only presented to give an idea of the method.
            It is assumed that for any real life problem a computer algorithm will
            be used to solve the system of equations, and such an algorithm will
            incorporate partial pivoting.

                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
