                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




           14                        Differential
                                     equations and
                                     difference
                                     equations
 ww
    w                  .Ea
14.1                                 In order to model most physical situations we need to simplify their

Introduction              syE        description. The idea of a system is central to this simplification. We
                                     identify the important elements that interact within the system. The only
                                     external interactions characterized as system inputs and the outputs are

                                                ngi
                                     the quantities related to the system behaviour which we are interested
                                     in measuring. For instance, in examining the suspension system of a car


                                                    n
                                     we consider the system input to be forces exerted on the wheels of the


                                                                  eer
                                     car. The important elements in the system are the mass of the car and the
                                     springs and dampers used to connect the body of the car to the suspension
                                     links. We are interested in measuring the amount of vertical movement

                                                                               ing
                                     of the car and the velocity of that movement in response, mainly, to a
                                     bumpy road. We can examine the behaviour of the system for various


                                                                                            .ne
                                     external forces – building up a picture of how the system behaves in
                                     normal driving conditions. We do not need to concern ourselves with an


                                                                                                t
                                     exact model of the surface of the major motorways. In this way we have
                                     managed to separate the problem of modelling the system from modelling
                                     the environment in which it is operating. A system with a single input
                                     and output is pictured in Figure 14.1.
                                        Dynamic physical processes involve variables which are interdepend-
                                     ent and constantly changing. When modelling the system we will obtain
                                     relationships between variables, many of which will be related through
Figure 14.1 A system has             derivatives. Even in a simple system with a mass, spring, and damper,
an input f (t ) which produces
an output response y (t ).
                                     there are many variables which can be identified, for example the exten-
                                     sion of the spring, and its velocity and acceleration, the potential energy
                                     stored in the spring and the force exerted by it, and the force exerted by
                                     the damper. A choice of variables that completely describe the system is
                                     an important task in systems analysis. These variables are then called the
                                     state variables. These can be related to each other and the system inputs
                                     through a system of first-order differential equations which are found by
                                     using scientific laws and engineering principles to model the system. The
                                     system output, which is some quantity that we wish to compare with
                                     the response of a real system, can then be calculated from the values of
                                     the state variables.
                                        A differential equation is one that involves some derivatives of the
                                     dependent variable, for example, dy/dt = ky is a differential equation.

                                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
