                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                       Differential equations and difference equations                   347

                                 We have already looked at a number of examples of differential equations.
                                 The simplest case, when the solution can be found by integration, was
                                 looked at in Chapter 7 and then we found that exponential functions are
                                 solutions to differential equations of the form dy/dt = ky in Chapter 8
                                 and in Chapter 10 we looked at the problem of circular motion and found
                                 that exponential functions are also solutions to equations of the form
                                 d2 y/dt2 = −ω2 y. In simple equations, we look for a solution which is a
                                 number. When solving a differential equation our idea of a solution is to
                                 find an explicit function for y in terms of t.
                                    We will only be concerned with single input, single output (SISO)
                                 systems in which case there are two ways of proceeding in order to solve
                                 the system of differential equations. The system may be reduced to a
                                 single differential equation and then solved, or the system may be solved
                                 directly. These two methods correspond, in systems theory, to the transfer
                                 function description of the system or a state variable description.
                                    The types of differential equations we shall look at are all linear; that

ww                               is, they involve no powers of y, the independent variable or powers of the
                                 derivative or products of any of these. Any real system will, of course have
                                 some non-linear behaviour. However, we usually assume that either the

   w              .Ea
                                 non-linearities present are not very important or that it is possible to ana-
                                 lyse a system as locally linear. Another important assumption used is that
                                 time invariance, that is, operating the system now or in an hours time with
                                 exactly the same input and initial conditions will yield the same result.

                     syE            The method of solution we use for finding a particular solution of
                                 differential equations in this chapter is called the method of unknown
                                 coefficients. An alternative method, using Laplace transforms, is more

                                            ngi
                                 widely applied, and we shall look at them in the next chapter.
                                    Differential equations are used to analyse systems that are subject to


                                                n
                                 continuous or piecewise continuous inputs. It may be necessary, or prefer-


                                                              eer
                                 able, to develop a discrete model of the system. A discrete model may be
                                 used if the exact nature of the system is unknown and we attempt to predict
                                 its nature by recording its response to various inputs. The recording of the

                                                                           ing
                                 system inputs and response will generally be stored in digital form and
                                 the data processed in digital form. Another major application of digital


                                                                                         .ne
                                 systems is for digital filter design. Here we wish to design digital filters
                                 with certain desirable characteristics. We can find the characteristics of


                                                                                             t
                                 digital systems by solving difference equations. We give a method of
                                 solution of simple difference equations. More frequently, z-transforms
                                 are used and these are discussed in the next chapter.



14.2 Modelling                   Damped forced motion of a spring
simple systems                   A spring of length l has a mass m attached to it and a dashpot damping the
                                 motion. It is subject to a force f (t) forcing the motion (see Figure 14.2).
                                    The input to this system is the forcing function f (t) and the output
                                 is the displacement of the spring from its original length, x. In order to
                                 model this system we make a number of assumptions about its behaviour.
                                 1. We assume Newton’s second law, FT = ma where a = m d2 x/dt 2
                                    and FT is the total force operating on the mass: m is the mass on the
                                    spring.
                                 2. The spring does not become distorted, that is, it is perfectly elastic.
Figure 14.2 Damped forced           This means, from Hooke’s Law, that FS = −kx, where x is the
motion of a spring.                 displacement from the original spring length l and k is the spring
                                    constant.
                                 3. The damping force due to the dashpot is FD = −r dx/dt

                                                           Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
