                           Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


370   Differential equations and difference equations

                                  The other part of the solution, where we consider the effect of the
                               forcing function, is called the steady state solution. For the solution found
                               in Example 14.8 where

                               y = −1.25 e−0.6t sin(0.8t) + sin(t)

                               we find that −1.25 e−0.6t sin(0.8t) is the transient and sin(t) is the steady
                               state solution. If we consider the system after some time has passes then
                               the transient will effectively be zero and we are left with y = sin(t), the
                               steady state solution.
                                  We have said that in any truly linear system, as represented, for
                               instance, by our models in Section 14.2, the constants must be posi-
                               tive with positive damping. However, we may wish to analyse non-linear
                               systems by using a locally linear approximation. In this situation they
                               may exhibit unstable behaviour, where the ‘transients’, instead of dying
                               out, display positive exponential behaviour and grow very large. This is


ww                             then referred to as an unstable system.
                                  We can analyse systems in the following way:
                               Stable system:A system is stable if all the solutions to the auxiliary equa-

   w              .Ea
                                 tion have negative real parts. A system with some purely imaginary
                                 solutions to the auxiliary equation can also considered to be stable
                                 although the complementary function does not die out as t → ∞ but
                                 represents sustained oscillations.

                     syE       Unstable system:A system is unstable if any solutions to the auxiliary
                                 equation have positive real parts or, for systems of higher order, if


                                          ngi
                                 there is a repeated, purely imaginary, solution.

                               Damped oscillations of a mechanical
                                              n
                               system – resonance
                                                             eer
                               For damped oscillations of a spring we have the differential equation

                               ⇔     m d2 x/dt 2 + r dx/dt + kx = f (t)
                                                                          ing
                                                                                         .ne
                               as shown in Section 14.2, where m is the mass, r the damping constant,
                               and k the spring constant. We shall look at the steady state solution in


                               resonance.                                                    t
                               the case where there is a single frequency input. We are interested in the
                               magnitude of the response in this case in order to analyse the problem of

                                  For simplicity we can regard the single frequency input as a complex
                               exponential f (t) = F0 ejωt where F0 is a constant. Having found the
                               response to the complex exponential, then as

                               F0 ejωt = F0 cos(ωt) + jF0 sin(ωt)

                               we can find the response to a cosine function by taking the real part of
                               the output or to a sine function by taking the imaginary part of the output
                               (this is an application of the linearity property).
                                  We have the equation mẍ + r ẋ + kx = F0 ejωt and we want to find the
                               steady state solution. Try a solution of the form x = c ejωt then

                               ẋ = cjω ejωt
                               ẍ = −cω2 ejωt

                               and substituting into the differential equation we find

                               −mcω2 ejωt + crjω ejωt + kc ejωt = F0 ejωt .

                                                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
