       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                   Differential equations and difference equations                 379

             3. If a function, y = g(t), is a solution to a differential equation in y
                then if, in the differential equation, we replace y and by g(t) and
                all the derivatives of y by the corresponding derivatives of g(t) then
                the result should be an identity for t. That is, it should be true for
                all values of t.
             4. To solve linear differential equations with constant coefficients, we
                solve the homogeneous equation (with f (t) = 0), thus finding the
                complementary function. This leads to the auxiliary equation which,
                for a second-order system is

                  aλ2 + bλ + c = 0.

                  This gives three possibilities for the complementary function,
                  depending on the roots for λ.
                                 √
                            −b ± b2 − 4ac

ww                λ1 , λ2 =
                                  2a

                  Case (1): Real distinct roots: y = A eλ1 t + B eλ2 t

   w.Ea
                  Case (2): Complex roots: y = ekt (A cos(ω0 t) + B sin(ω0 t))
                  Case (3): The roots are equal, then λ = k = −b/2a, y = (At +
                                B)ekt .


       syE        We then find a particular solution to the equation by using a trial
                  solution as suggested in Table 14.1. The sum of the complemen-
                  tary function and a particular solution gives the general solution of


             5.        ngi
                  the differential equation. The initial conditions are used to find the
                  arbitrary constants A and B.
                  For a truly linear system, the complementary function dies out as

                           n
                  t → ∞ and is called the transient solution, The other part of the

                                         eer
                  solution, in response to the input f (t), is called the steady state
                  solution. When analysing a system as locally linear, we say that


                                                      ing
                  the system is unstable if the roots of the complementary function
                  have a positive real part. In these circumstances, the complementary
                  function → ∞ as t → ∞. Higher order systems are also unstable

             6.
                  if there is a repeated purely imaginary root.
                                                                   .ne
                  Resonance occurs when, in an underdamped system, the forcing

             7.

             8.
                                                                       t
                  frequency approaches the natural frequency of the system.
                  Systems of differential equations may be solved using a matrix
                  method.
                  Discrete systems may be represented by difference equations (also
                  called recurrence relations). A second-order linear system is rep-
                  resented by ayn + byn−1 + cyn−2 = fn . To solve this equation
                  we find the solution to the homogeneous system (setting fn = 0),
                  which leads to the auxiliary equation

                  aλ2 + bλ + c = 0.

                  This leads to three possibilities for the complementary function
                  depending on the roots for λ:
                                 √
                            −b ± b2 − 4ac
                  λ1 , λ2 =
                                   2a

                  Case (1):   λ1 and λ2 are real and distinct.

                              yn = a(λ1 )n + b(λ2 )n .

                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
