               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     15            Laplace and
                   z transforms

15.1               In this chapter, we will present a quick review of Laplace transform


ww
Introduction
                   methods for continuous and piecewise continuous systems and z trans-
                   form methods for discrete systems. The widespread application of these
                   methods means that engineers need increasingly to be able to apply these

   w      .Ea
                   techniques in multitudes of situations.
                      Laplace transforms are used to reduce a differential equation to a simple
                   equation in s-space and a system of differential equations to a system of
                   linear equations. We discover that in the case of zero initial conditions,

             syE   we can solve the system by multiplying the Laplace transform of the input
                   function by the transfer function of the system. Furthermore, if we are
                   only interested in the steady state response, and we have a periodic input,

                                 ngi
                   we can find the response by simply adding the response to each of the
                   frequency components of the input signal. In Chapter 16, we therefore


                                     n
                   look at finding the frequency components of a periodic function by finding


                                                 eer
                   its Fourier series.
                      Similar ideas apply to z transform methods applied to difference
                   equations representing discrete systems.

                                                              ing
                      The system transfer function is the Laplace transform of the impulse
                   response function of the system. The impulse response is its response to an


                                                                            .ne
                   impulse function also called a delta function. Inputting an impulse func-
                   tion can be though of as something like giving the system a short kick
                   to see what happens next. The impulse function is an idealized kick, as



                   famous example of a generalized function.
                                                                                t
                   it lasts for no time at all and has energy of exactly 1. Because of these
                   requirements, we find that the delta function is not a function at all, in the
                   sense that we defined functions in Chapter 1. We find that it is the most




                   The Laplace transform F (s) of the function f (t) defined for t > 0 is
15.2 The                    ∞
Laplace            F (s) =     e−st f (t) dt.
                             0
transform –
                   The Laplace transform is a function of s where s is a complex variable.
definition         Because the integral definition of the Laplace transform involves an inte-
                   gral to ∞ it is usually necessary to limit possible values of s so that the
                   integral converges (i.e. does not tend to ∞). Also, for many functions the
                   Laplace transform does not exist at all.
                      L{ } is the symbolic representation of the process of taking a Laplace
                   transform (LT). Therefore,
                   L{f (t)} = F (s).

                                              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
