                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                            Laplace and z transforms               385




Figure 15.4 (a) The graph of sin(ωt ). (b) The graph of u(t − 1) sin(ωt ). Notice that this function is zero for
t < 1 and equal to sin(ωt ) for t > 1.




ww
   w                  .Ea
                         syE
Figure 15.5 The sequence                            ngi
of rectangular pulse functions
of area 1. Starting from a
pulse of height 1 and width 1
we double the height and half
                                                        n              eer
the width.
                                                                                   ing
                                                                                                .ne
                                            The delta function, δ(t), is an example of a generalized function. A

                                                                                                    t
                                         generalized function can be defined in terms of a sequence of functions.
                                         One way of defining it is as the limit of a rectangular pulse function,
                                         with area 1, as it halves in width and doubles in height. This sequence
                                         of functions is shown in Figure 15.5. Although the height of the pulse is
                                         tending to infinity, the area of the pulse remains 1.
                                            Two important properties of the delta function are
                                         1.   δ(t
                                               ∞− a) = 0 for t = a,
                                         2.    −∞ δ(t) = 1.

                                         The second property expresses the fact that the area enclosed by the delta
                                         function is 1.
                                            The unit step function, u(t), has no derivative at t = 0. Because of the
                                         sharp edges present in its graph and its jump discontinuity it is impossible
                                         to define a single tangent at that point. However, if we also consider the
                                         unit step function as a generalized function (by taking the limit of nice
                                         smooth, continuous curves as they approach the shape of the unit step
                                         function), we are able to define its derivative, which turns out to be the
                                         delta function. This gives the third definition
                                         3.   du/dt = δ(t).

                                                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
