                                    Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                                   Laplace and z transforms           415

                                                values of s so that the integral above converges (i.e. does not tend
                                                to ∞ ).
                                           2.   The impulse function, δ(t), also called a delta function, is the most
                                                famous example of a generalized function. The impulse function
                                                represents an idealized kick as it lasts for no time at all and has
                                                energy of exactly 1.
                                           3.   Laplace transforms are usually found by using a table of transforms
                                                (as in Table 15.1) and also by using properties of the transform, some
                                                of which are listed in Section 15.4.
                                           4.   Laplace transforms are used to reduce a differential equation to a
                                                simple equation in s-space. This can then be solved and the inverse
                                                transform used to find the solution to the differential equation.
                                           5.   The transfer function of the system, H (s), is the Laplace transform of
                                                its impulse response function with zero initial conditions, h(t). The
                                                Laplace transform of the response to any input function, with zero
                                                initial conditions, can be found by multiply the Laplace transform

ww                                         6.
                                                of the input function by the transfer function of the system Y (s) =
                                                H (s)F (s).
                                                The steady state response to a single frequency input ejωt is

   w                   .Ea                 7.
                                                H ( jω)ejωt . H ( jω) is called the frequency response function.
                                                The z transform of a sequence f0 , f1 , f2 , . . . , fn , . . . is given by
                                                           ∞
                                                                 fn z−n .

                          syE                    F (z) =
                                                           n=0

                                                As this is an infinite summation it will not always converge. The set

                                           8.         ngi
                                                of values of z for which it exists is called the region of convergence.
                                                The discrete impulse function or delta function is defined by
                                                       
                                                 δn =
                                                          n
                                                         1 n=0
                                                         0 n = 0.
                                                                              eer
                                           9.
                                                                                         ing
                                             z transforms are usually found by using a table of transforms (as in
                                             Table 15.2) and also by using properties of the transform, some of


                                                                                                      .ne
                                             which are listed in Section 15.7
                                         10. z transforms are used to reduce a difference equation to a simple
                                             equation in z-space. This can then be solved and the inverse transform
                                             used to find the solution to the difference equation.
                                                                                                          t
                                         11. The transfer function of a discrete system, H (z), is the z transform
                                             of its impulse response function with zero initial conditions, hn . The
                                             z transform of the response to any input function, with zero initial
                                             conditions, can be found by multiply the z transform of the input
                                             function by the transfer function of the system, Y (z) = H (z)F (z).
                                         12. The steady state response of a discrete system to a single frequency
                                             input ejωn is H (ejω )ejωn · H (ejωn ) is called the frequency response
                                             function.


15.11 Exercises
15.1. Using the definition of the Laplace transform                                      2
                                                                        (a) L{2e4t } =
                  ∞                                                                   s−4
                                                                                           3
      L{f (t)} =       e−st f (t) dt                                    (b) L{3e−2t } =
                   0
                                                                                        s+2
                                                                                          5     3
                                                                        (c) L{5t − 3} = 2 −
      show the following. In each case specify the values of                             s      s
      s for which the transform exists.                                                        3s
                                                                        (d) L{3 cos(5t)} = 2
                                                                                             s + 25

                                                                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
