                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     16             Fourier series

16.1                Fourier analysis is the theory behind frequency analysis of signals. This
                    chapter is concerned with the Fourier analysis of periodic, piecewise con-
Introduction        tinuous functions. A periodic function can be represented by a Fourier
                    series. A non-periodic function can be represented by its Fourier trans-


ww                  form which we shall not be concerned with here. Discrete functions may
                    be represented by a discrete Fourier transform, which also we shall not
                    look at in this book.

   w      .Ea
                       Any periodic signal is made up of the sum of single frequency
                    components. These components consist of a fundamental frequency com-
                    ponent, multiples of the fundamental frequency, called the harmonics and
                    a bias term, which represents the average off-set from zero. There are three

             syE    ways of representing this information which are equivalent. We can rep-
                    resent the frequency components as the sum of a sine and cosine terms,
                    or by considering the amplitude and phase of each component, or we can

                               ngi
                    represent them using a complex Fourier series. The use of the complex
                    Fourier series simplifies the calculation.


                                   n
                       Having found the Fourier components we can use the system’s fre-


                                                  eer
                    quency response function, as found in the previous chapter, to find the
                    steady state response to any periodic signal.



16.2 Periodic                                                 ing
                    In Chapter 5 we discussed the property of periodicity of the trigonometric

Functions                                                                   .ne
                    functions. A periodic function is one whose graph can be translated to the
                    right or left by an amount, called the period, such that the new graph fits


                    in order to fit over the original graph.                    t
                    exactly on top of the original graph. The fundamental period, also called
                    the cycle, is the minimum non-zero amount the graph needs to be shifted

                       A periodic function, with period τ , satisfies f (t + τ ) = f (t) for all
                    values of t. Examples of periodic functions are given in Figure 16.1.
                       The fundamental frequency of a periodic function is the number of
                    cycles in an interval of unit length, f = 1/τ . The fundamental angular
                    frequency is then given by ω0 = 2πf = 2π/τ . A periodic function need
                    only be defined in one cycle, as the periodicity property will then define
                    it everywhere. For example, the graph of the periodic square wave
                             
                                1/2 0 < t < 1
                    f (t) =
                               −1/2 1 < t < 2

                    is drawn in Figure 16.2. First, we draw the section of the graph as given
                    in the definition and then shift the section along by the period, in this
                    case 2, and copy the section. By repeatedly shifting and copying in this
                    way, both to the left and right, we get the graph as shown.
                       As we mentioned in the introduction there are three ways of expressing
                    the Fourier series. As a sine and cosine series or in amplitude and phase
                    form or in complex form.

                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
