                                    Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


426    Fourier series




 ww
    w                   .Ea
Figure 16.5 (a) An even function satisfies f (−t ) = f (t ), that is reflecting the graph in the y-axis results in the
same graph. This function has only cosine terms in its Fourier series. (b) An odd function satisfies
f (−t ) = −f (t ), that is reflecting the graph in the y-axis results in an upside down version of the same graph.

                           syE
This function has only sine terms in its Fourier series. (c) A function with half-wave symmetry satisfies
f (t + τ/2) = −f (t ) that is the graph of the function in the second half of the period is the same as the graph of
the function in the first half reflected in the x-axis. This function has no even harmonics.

                                                      ngi
16.5 Amplitude
and phase
                                                          n
                                          In Chapter 9, when considering using vectors to represent single fre-

                                                                         eer
                                          quency waves, we saw that terms like c cos(ωt) − d sin(ωt) can be
                                          represented by a single cosine term A cos(ωt + φ) where A is the ampli-
representation
of a Fourier                                                                          ing
                                          tude and φ is the phase. The terms A and φ can be found by expressing
                                          the vector (c, d) in polar form. We can employ this idea to represent
                                          the Fourier series in amplitude and phase form. This can be very useful

series                                                                                              .ne
                                          because, for instance, a filter may be designed to attenuate frequencies
                                          outside of the desired pass band. this requirement specifies its ampli-

                                          separately.
                                                                                                        t
                                          tude characteristics. The phase characteristics may then be considered

                                             The Fourier series becomes
                                                            ∞
                                                    1      
                                          f (t) =     a0 +   cn cos(nω0 t + φn )
                                                    2
                                                           n=1

                                          where

                                          cn cos(nω0 t + φn ) = an cos(nω0 t) + bn sin(nω0 t)

                                          From the trigonometric identity for cos(A + B), we can expand the left-
                                          hand side of the above expression to get

                                          cn cos(nω0 ) cos(φn )−cn sin(nω0 ) sin(φn ) = an cos(nω0 t)+bn sin(nω0 t)

                                          Equating terms in cos(nω0 t) and sin(nω0 t), we get

                                            cn cos(φn ) = an
                                          −cn sin(φn ) = bn

                                                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
