                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     17               Functions of more
                      than one variable

ww
17.1
Introduction
                      We concentrated so far in this book on functions of time. In Chapter 5 we
                      looked at waves that were functions of distance, x, and time, t. For many
                      applications, we need to analyse functions of the three possible spatial

   w      .Ea
                      coordinates, x, y, and z and also of time, t. For instance, consider making
                      a mug of tea using a tea bag. When first brewed, the temperature will be
                      nearly at boiling point 100◦ C. The temperature of the water will start off
                      being much the same everywhere but it will be cooler near the tea bag

             syE      and at the sides of the mug. As time progresses the surface of the tea and
                      those parts in touch with the mug, will cool quicker than the centre of the
                      tea. We can see that the temperature of a mug of tea is a function both of

                                ngi
                      where in the mug we measure it and also the length of time since the tea
                      was first made. This is a function of more than one variable.


                                    n
                         Some of the ideas that we have learnt for analysing a function of a


                                                   eer
                      single variable we revisit here for functions of more than one variable.
                      In this chapter we consider graphs of functions and taking their partial
                      derivatives, changing variables, using the chain rule and the derivative in

                                                                ing
                      any given direction. To begin we need to think about visualizing these
                      functions and that means considering how to visualize graphs of functions

                      two-dimensional sheet of paper.
                                                                             .ne
                      that would require three or more dimensions when armed only with a




17.2 Functions
                                                                                 t
                      When drawing a graph we need one dimension to represent the actual
                      function value, the dependent variable, for which we have used the ver-
of two                tical axis. When drawing a graph of distance, x or of time t, we are able
                      to use the horizontal axis of the graph to represent the independent vari-
variables –           able. Supposing now we have a function of two spatial dimensions – for
surfaces              instance, the height above sea level on a landscape or the temperature in
                      a cup of tea at the surface of the tea. We would like to be able to picture
                      these functions. However, we need more than one horizontal axis in order
                      to be able to represent the spatial dimensions x and y when a picture on
                      a page of this book has only one horizontal direction. We could build
                      three-dimensional models only this would be time consuming and make
                      book production even more costly. One of the ways of representing these
                      graphs on a page of paper is to use a perspective representation of a sur-
                      face. The other way of doing it is to draw a plan of the function from above
                      and use contours to represent the function value at each point. You are
                      familiar with this from maps that mark contours representing the height
                      of the ground at each point. Another example is meteorological forecasts
                      that use contours superimposed on maps of the country, to represent the

                                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
