                                     Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


436    Functions of more than one variable
              (a)                                           (b)




 ww           (c)                                           (d)



    w                   .Ea
                           syE
                                                        ngi
               0
                    0
                                                            n     0
                                                                      0

                                                                            eer
Figure 17.1 Graphs of φ = 4πε0 q/(x + y ) . (a) A perspective view. (b) Contour representation. (c) A
                                          2     2 1/2


value of x .
                                                                                        ing
cross-section parallel to the x -axis for a fixed value of y . (d) A cross-section parallel to the y -axis for a fixed




                                           parallel to either one of the x- or y-axes.                .ne
                                           air pressure. A third way to picture the functions is to take a cross section



                                           Graphs of functions of two variables                           t
                                           The function:

                                                    4πε0 q
                                           φ=
                                                 (x + y 2 )1/2
                                                   2


                                           represents the electrical potential field of a point source (where z = 0)
                                           positioned at the origin. Various graphs of this function are shown in
                                           Figure 17.1: (a) has a perspective view; (b) has a contour representation;
                                           and (c) and (d) show x and y cross-sections.
                                             Graphs of the function h = 4 − 2x 2 + y are shown in Figure 17.2.



                                           From the graphs of functions that we looked at in the last section we can
17.3 Partial                               see that we are able to take a cross-section either parallel to the x-axis or
differentiation                            parallel to the y-axis. Each cross-section can be represented by a function
                                           of one variable only. If we take a cross-section parallel to the x-axis, then

                                                                          Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
