                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                                           Graph theory         463

                                      Subgraph
                                      A subgraph of G is a graph, H, whose vertex set is a subset of G’s vertex
                                      set, and similarly its edge set is a subset of the edge set of G.


                                      V (H) ⊆ V (G)
                                      E(H) ⊆ E(G)


                                      If it spans all of the vertices of G, that is, V (H) = V (G) then H is called a
                                      spanning subgraph of G. A graph G, a subgraph, and a spanning subgraph
                                      are shown in Figure 19.7.




ww                                    Complete graph

   w                 .Ea
                                      A simple graph in which every pair of two vertices is adjacent is called
                                      a complete graph. Kn is the complete graph with n vertices. Kn has
                                      2 n(n − 1) edges. Some examples of complete graphs are shown in
                                      1

                                      Figure 19.8.


                        syE           Bipartite graph
                                                 ngi
                                      This is a graph whose vertex set can be partitioned into two sets in such a


                                                     n
                                      way that each edge joins a vertex of the first set to a vertex of the second


                                                                    eer
                                      set. Some examples are given in Figure 19.9.
                                         A complete bipartite graph is a bipartite simple graph in which every
                                      vertex in the first set is adjacent to every vertex in the second set. Km,n is

                                                                                 ing
                                      the complete bipartite graph with m vertices in the first set and n vertices



                                                                                               .ne
                                                                                                   t
Figure 19.7 (a) A graph G. (b) A subgraph of G.                  Figure 19.8 Complete graphs (a) K3 ;
(c) A spanning subgraph of G.                                    (b) K4 ; (c) K5 .




Figure 19.9 Bipartite
graphs. (b) and (c) are the
complete bipartite graphs K2,4
and K3,1 .


                                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
