                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


 466    Graph theory




Figure 19.13 (a) A tree is a connected graph with no
cycles. (b) A forest has no cycles, but may or may not
be connected.




  ww
     w                 .Ea
                                                             Figure 19.14 A parsing tree for the sentence
                                                             ‘Fortune favours the brave’.




                          syE             If T is a tree with at least two vertices, then it has the three properties
                                        (T1), (T2), and (T3):


                                        vertex vj .
                                                   ngi
                                        (T1) There is exactly one path from any vertex vi in T to any other



                                                       n
                                        (T2) The graph obtained from T by removing any edge has two


                                                                      eer
                                        components, each of which is a tree.
                                        (T3) |E| = |V | − 1.


                                                                                   ing
                                           Trees have many applications, particularly rooted trees. Decision trees
                                        are used to represent the possible decisions at each stage of a problem

                                                                                                .ne
                                        or algorithm. Probability trees can be used to analyse conditional prob-
                                        abilities, which we shall see in Chapter 21. Another application is to


                                                                                                    t
                                        parsing of a sentence. The tree in Figure 19.14 represents the sentence
                                        ‘Fortune favours the brave’. The vertices, other than the terminal vertices,
                                        represent grammatical categories and the terminal vertices represent the
                                        words of the sentence. The same sort of idea can be used to analyse
                                        allowed constructs of statements in programming languages and the syn-
                                        tax of arithmetic expressions. We look at this application of trees in the
                                        next chapter on language theory.


                                        Spanning trees
                                        A spanning tree of a graph G is a tree T which is a spanning subgraph
                                        of G. That is, T has the same vertex set as G. Examples of graphs with
                                        spanning trees marked are given in Figure 19.15.


                                        How to grow a spanning tree
                                        Take any vertex v of G as an initial partial tree. Add edges one by one so
                                        each new edge joins a new vertex to the partial tree. If there are n vertices
                                        in the graph G then the spanning tree will have n vertices and n − 1 edges.

                                                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
