                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                                       Graph theory        467




       Figure 19.15 Graphs with spanning trees shaded.




                                                               Figure 19.16 A weighted complete
                                                               graph. The vertices represent
                                                               offices and the edges represent

ww                                                             possible communication links. The
                                                               weights on the edges represent the
                                                               cost of construction of the link.


   w                 .Ea             Minimum spanning tree

                        syE          Supposing we have a group of offices which need to be connected by
                                     a network of communication lines. The offices may communicate with
                                     each other directly or through another office. In order to decide on which

                                               ngi
                                     offices to build links between we firstly work out the cost of all possible
                                     connections. This will then give us a weighted complete graph as shown


                                                   n
                                     in Figure 19.16.


                                                                 eer
                                        The minimum spanning tree is then the spanning tree that represents
                                     the minimum cost.


                                                                              ing
                                                                                           .ne
                                                                                               t
Figure 19.17 The graph of
Figure 19.16 with its minimum
spanning tree marked.




                                     The greedy algorithm for the minimum
                                     spanning tree
                                     1. Choose any start vertex to form the initial partial tree (vi ).
                                     2. Add the cheapest edge, ei , to a new vertex to form a new partial tree.
                                     3. Repeat Step 2 until all vertices have been included in the tree.

                                                              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
