                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


472    Graph theory




Figure 19.26 A network.
The weights on the arcs
represent the capacity of the
arc. s is the source and t is
the sink.




 ww                                 Finding a maximum flow
                                     1. Assign an initial flow to each edge (this will probably be 0 flow on

    w                 .Ea
                                        each arc).
                                     2. Find a flow-augmenting path from s to t. Any arc along this flow-
                                        augmenting path may be either in the forward direction, that is,
                                        in the same direction as the path, or in the backward direction,

                         syE            that is, in the opposite direction to the path. If the arc along the
                                        path is in the forward direction, then it must have some ‘extra’
                                        capacity c(ak ) ⩾ f (ak ) then the extra capacity is represented by

                                               ngi
                                        k = c(ak ) − f (ak ). If the arc along the path is in the backward
                                        direction, then f (ak ) must be greater than 0 and we assign the


                                                   n
                                        possible increase in flow k = f (ak ). We can then calculate the


                                                                  eer
                                        amount that this path can augment the flow by as  = minimum
                                        (k ), where we consider all the values of along the path.
                                     3. We can now change the value of the flow function along the flow-

                                                                              ing
                                        augmenting path to f (ak ) +  (for arcs in the forward direction
                                        along the path) and f (ak ) −  (for arcs in the backward direction


                                                                                            .ne
                                        along the path). We then repeat the second stage and look for another
                                        flow-augmenting path. If no more flow-augmenting paths exist, then


                                                                                                t
                                        we have found the maximum flow. This algorithm is due to Ford
                                        and Fulkerson. It can take a long while to terminate on complicated
                                        networks and better algorithms have been developed, for example,
                                        the Dinic algorithm which is not given here. We can check that we
                                        have in fact found the maximum flow in the network by finding
                                        the minimum cut. The max-flow, min-cut theorem states that the
                                        maximum value of a flow from s to t in a network is equal to the
                                        minimum capacity of a cut separating s and t.




                                    Example 19.3 Find the maximum flow from s to t in the network shown
                                    in Figure 19.27(a). The weights on the arcs represent their capacities.


                                    Solution We begin by identifying a flow-augmenting path s, e, t. As
                                    initially we consider the flow function to be zero then the spare capacities
                                    along the arcs are 12 and 14, the minimum of which is 12. We therefore
                                    assign a flow of 12 along the path to get Figure 19.27(b).

                                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
