                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


476   Graph theory

                                      can be represented as a list (off-hook, connected, dialing, tone, bell)
                                      which can take a selection of values to indicate the current state of the
                                      telephone, for example, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE, engaged, OFF indicates
                                      that the phone is off-hook, it is not connected, it is not dialing it has the
                                      engaged tone, and the bell is OFF. Use your knowledge of the operation
                                      of a telephone to give a full list of the possible states of the phone. Draw
                                      a state transition diagram to represent the life-cycle of the phone.
                                      Solution The possible states are given in Table 19.8.
                                         The possible events are: Pick up receiver, replace receiver, wait, dial
                                      a number, someone calls your number. The events that are possible and
                                      the transitions that they cause depend on the current state of the phone.
                                      The state transition diagram is shown in Figure 19.28.

          b       b       c
      S       A       B       H       Example 19.5 Figure 19.29 shows a deterministic finite state recognizer
a


ww                b       c           (DFSR) for a language consisting of strings of the letters a, b, and c. To
                                      test whether a certain string is accepted by the DFSR:
Figure 19.29 A DFSR for
Example 19.5.                         1. Start at the start state, labelled as S.

   w                  .Ea
                                      2. Take a letter from the left of the string. If possible, move along a
                                         transition arc labelled with that letter.
                                      3. Repeat step 2 moving through the DFSR until either you find that
                                         you cannot move because there is no appropriately labelled arc or the

                         syE             string is exhausted. If, when the string is exhausted you have reached
                                         the halt state (marked as H in a square box) then the string has been
                                         accepted. If, when the string is exhausted you have not reached the

                                                   ngi
                                         halt state, or if at any point there are no legal moves, then the string
                                         is not accepted.


                                                       n
                                         (a) show that abbc is an acceptable string,


                                                                      eer
                                         (b) show that abbb is not an acceptable string,
                                         (c) show that ababab is not an acceptable string.

                                      Solution
                                      (a)                                          ing
                                          We find a path from S to H along arcs labelled abbc. To do this, we

                                                                                                .ne
                                          travel along arcs in the following order SS, SA, AB, BH. As this
                                          path begins with S and ends with H we have shown that the DFSR
                                          recognizes the string abbc.
                                                                                                    t
                                      (b) We look at the path labelled abbb beginning at S. The only possible
                                          path is: SSAB. As this path does not end at H we have shown that
                                          the DFSR does not recognize the string abbb.
                                      (c) We look for a path labelled ababab. No such path exists as it would
                                          begin with the arcs SS, SA and then there is no arc out of A labelled
                                          ‘b’. As there are no more legal moves we have shown that the string
                                          is not accepted.



                                      1.    A graph consists of a set of vertices, V and a set of edges, E. A digraph
19.8 Summary                                is a directed graph, with arcs instead of edges. Various definitions
                                            for different types of graphs are given in Section 19.2.
                                      2.    Graphs can be represented by an incidence matrix or an adjacency
                                            matrix.
                                      3.    Various optimization algorithms have been demonstrated in this
                                            chapter, including the greedy algorithm for the minimum spanning
                                            tree and the solution to the minimum path problem. For these two
                                            examples, the weights on the graph represent lengths, costs, or delays.
                                            We have also looked at one solution to the maximum flow problem.

                                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
