               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




     20             Language theory

20.1                We all use natural language to communicate. In a natural language, there is
                    no strictly formal way of deciding exactly what is or is not an acceptable

ww
Introduction        sentence. This is because natural language is constantly evolving and
                    subject to cultural diversities. The meaning of a sentence in a natural
                    language is yet another problem. A sentence may have different meanings

   w      .Ea
                    in different parts of the world or because of ambiguities arising from its
                    structure. If I say ‘I locked my car keys in my boot’ in England I have
                    accidentally left my car keys in the boot (trunk) of my car. In America I
                    have cleverly forced them into a lockable shoe. If I say ‘Green fields like

             syE    a wet blanket’ I could be making a poetic reference to the covering of
                    dew or rain being helpful for keeping a field green or I could be making
                    disparaging comments about a cricket fielder called Green. Meanings

                              ngi
                    associated with language are called semantics whereas its structure forms
                    the syntax of the language.


                                  n
                       There are reasons for requiring a simpler definition of language to use


                                                eer
                    in formal situations. For instance, there are programming languages used
                    for writing computer instructions. We would hope that the decision as
                    to whether a particular sequence of symbols forms a program could be

                                                             ing
                    exactly determined. Also we would like to reduce any ambiguities as to its
                    meaning so that any computer faced with the same program might take


                                                                          .ne
                    the same actions. Even in natural language it can be desirable to have
                    rules that can be applied to the language to produce a generally accepted


                                                                              t
                    version of the language. This can be used for cross-cultural exchange
                    and such a formalized version of a language can also simplify translation
                    from one natural language to another.
                       A formal language consists of a set of sequences of symbols called
                    sentences. The membership of the language set is usually defined by
                    using grammar rules. Using the grammar rules to determine whether a
                    particular string of symbols constitutes a sentence is called parsing. One
                    way to do this would be to repeatedly use the grammar rules to list all
                    the sentences in the language and stop if our sentence appears. This is
                    not very practical because the number of sentences in a languages can
                    be very large or even infinite. A refinement of this approach would be to
                    use the grammar rules to find all sentences at least as long as the string
                    of symbols we are interested in and check whether our sentence appears.
                    These are called top-down approaches because we start with the rules
                    and derive sentences. Alternatively, we could try and start with a string
                    of symbols and test whether it obeys the grammar rules provided. This
                    is a bottom-up approach which involves applying the grammar rules in
                    reverse. We find that only certain sorts of grammars are easy, or possible,
                    to use in reverse in this manner. For these grammars, which are easier
                    to parse, we can define a procedure to test whether any given string is
                    a sentence. The procedure that is used is called a parser. Identifying

                                             Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
