                        Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


480   Language theory

                            grammars with simple parsing procedures is an important consideration
                            when designing a new computer language.
                               We look at eXtensible Markup Language (XML) as a method of
                            defining a markup language. There are many easily accessible tools for
                            checking whether an XML document is well formed and it is therefore
                            ideal as a way of communicating data.



20.2 Languages              Definitions
and grammars                A language is a set of sequences of symbols. A sequence of symbols is
                            called a string.
                               An element of the language set is called a sentence. Some texts refer
                            to the element of the language as a word or sometimes a well-formed
                            formula or well-formed document depending on the type of language


ww                          being discussed. For instance, logical expressions involving propositions
                            or predicates, which we looked at in Chapter 3, can be regarded as sen-
                            tences in the language of logic. In this case an expression which makes


   w            .Ea
                            sense is called a well-formed formula or wff (pronounced ‘woof’). An
                            example of a logical sentence or wff is ‘p∧q⇒p’ but ‘p⇔∧q’ is not
                            a sentence.
                               A symbol which forms part of a sentence is called a terminal symbol.


                   syE      For instance, the terminal symbols in the sentence ‘The cat sat on the
                            mat’ are ‘The’, ‘cat’, ‘sat’, ‘on’, ‘the’ and ‘mat’. The terminal symbols
                            in ‘p ∧ q⇒p’ are ‘p’, ‘∧’, ‘q’ and ‘⇒’.


                                        ngi
                               Other symbols are used to express the grammar rules for the language.
                            These symbols are called non-terminal symbols. In a natural language we
                            could say that a simple sentence is made up of a noun phrase followed

                                            n
                            by a verb phrase possibly followed by a noun phrase. Then symbols

                                                          eer
                            representing ‘simple sentence’, ‘noun phrase’ and ‘verb phrase’ would
                            be amongst our non-terminal symbols. In logic, we could say that a binary


                                                                       ing
                            operation consists of a proposition followed by a binary operator followed
                            by a proposition. Then symbols representing ‘proposition’ and ‘binary
                            operator’ would be amongst our non-terminal symbols.

                                                                                    .ne
                               The grammar rules for the language give rules for replacing symbols
                            by other symbols. For instance, in a natural language we might replace

                            are called rewriting rules or productions.
                                                                                        t
                            ‘noun phrase’ by ‘article’, ‘adjective’, and ‘noun’. These grammar rules

                               When we write the rewriting rules or productions we will write
                            one symbol followed by another. This indicates the operation of
                            concatenation. Concatenation is the process of writing two or more
                            symbols as one.
                               We carry on using rewriting rules or productions to replace symbols
                            until we find a sequence of symbols that only contains terminal symbols.
                            Then we have found a sentence.
                               In order to use the rewriting rules we must have a starting point. The
                            starting point of the grammar is called the initial or start symbol. This is
                            a symbol which represents an entire sentence. For a computer program it
                            would represent the whole program.
                               We can now state that a grammar consists of four things:
                            1.   A set of terminal symbols.
                            2.   A set of non-terminal symbols.
                            3.   A set of rewriting rules or productions. Every rule has a left-hand side
                                 and right-hand side. The meaning of a rule is that you can substitute
                                 its right-hand side for its left-hand side.
                            4.   A designated start symbol.

                                                       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
