       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                          Language theory           481

            Terminal symbols are often represented by lowercase letters and
            non-terminal symbols by uppercase letters.
              A sentence is grammatical if it can be produced by a series of rewritings
            such that
            1.   It starts with the start symbol.
            2.   It uses grammar rules to get from one rewriting to the next.
            3.   It does not contain any non-terminals.
            A grammar rule or production is a pair of strings of terminal and
            non-terminal symbols (P, Q). P is called the left-hand side of the rule
            and Q the right-hand side. This means that P may be replaced by Q. This
            is often represented as
            P→Q
               A derivation, of one string of symbols, Y, from another string of sym-


ww
            bols, X, is a sequence of application of productions which derives one
            string from another. If Y can be derived from X then we can write X⇒∗ Y.
            The notation ‘⇒∗ ’ indicates zero or more steps and ‘⇒’ indicates a


   w.Ea
            single step.
               A string of terminal symbols is a sentence if it can be derived from the
            start symbol.



       syE  Example 20.1 A language, L, over the symbols a and b, is defined by
            the following grammar rules, where S is the start symbol.
            S→aSb
            S→ab
                        ngi
                            n
            Find a definition of the set L.


                                         eer
            Solution We start with the symbol S and use either one of the grammar
            rules to make a replacement. We choose the rule
            S→aSb
                                                      ing
            to get
                                                                    .ne
            S⇒aSb
            Using the rule S→aSb again to give
            S⇒aSb⇒aaSbb
                                                                        t
            continuing using the same rule and we can see that we get
            S⇒∗ an−1 S bn−1
            after n − 1 applications of the rule. Here, an−1 has been used as shorthand
            for the repetition of ‘a’ n-1 times. There is still at least one non-terminal
            symbol in the right-hand side. We would need to use the second rule
            S→ab
            to obtain
            S⇒∗ an bn
            We can see that the language consists of a number of ‘a’s followed by the
            same number of ‘b’s and so
            L = {an bn where n > 0}.

                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
