                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                      Language theory         483

                        Similarly, we can start with S → (S) and then substitute S → N followed
                        by N → 0 or N → 1, to give:

                        S⇒∗ (0)    S⇒∗ (1)

                        So the language consists of only the following sentences of length less
                        than or equal to 4

                        0+0       0+1        1+0      1+1       0·0      0·1      1·0      1·1
                        0         1          (0)      (1)

                        We can see that the string 1 · 10 does not appear in this list of sentences
                        and so 1 · 10 is not a sentence.
                        (b) To show that (1.1) is a sentence we need to look at sentences of five
                        symbols. In our solution to (a) we already found (1.1) to be a sentence
                        as we derived S⇒∗ (1.1) by using S → (S) followed by S → NBN with

ww                      N replaced by ‘1’ on both occurrences and B replaced by ‘·’ So we have
                        the derivation S⇒(S)⇒(NBN)⇒(1.1). We have shown that S⇒∗ (1.1).
                        This string contains only terminal symbols and therefore (1.1) is a

   w      .Ea
                        sentence.


                        Context-free languages
             syE        Formal grammars were studied by a linguist, Noam Chomsky, in the
                        1950s. Chomsky proposed a classification of grammars of which the most

                                  ngi
                        important classification, for our current interest, is that of context-free
                        languages. Grammars that allow only a single non-terminal and nothing


                                      n
                        else on the left-hand side of the rule are called context free.


                                                     eer
                           Chomsky proposed a transformation procedure to transform gram-
                        mars of context-free languages to Chomsky Normal Form. His work
                        influenced John Backus, who realized that programming languages are

                                                                 ing
                        mostly context free. He used context-free grammars to describe the syn-
                        tax of programs, and developed what is now called ‘Backus Normal


                                                                               .ne
                        Form’ or ‘Backus Naur Form’. It has since been further revised and
                        extended so nowadays programming language specifications are written
                        in EBNF, Extended Backus-Naur Form. Before looking at EBNF we look
                        at derivation graphs and derivation trees.
                                                                                   t
                        A derivation can be represented using a digraph. We draw a vertex for the
20.3                    start symbol, a vertex for each production at each step of the derivation
Derivations and         and a vertex for each symbol on the right-hand side of each step of the
                        derivation. The following example is for a context-sensitive language.
derivation trees
                        Example 20.3 A language is defined over the symbols {a,b} with the
                        following productions (labelled r1 –r5 ):

                        r1 : S → SBba
                        r2 : bBa → aAb
                        r3 : bA → AB
                        r4 : Bb → bBa
                        r5 : S → bB
                        r6 : B → a


                                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
