                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                   Language theory          485

                     bottom of the pile is inaccessible. In this way, any number of symbols
                     can be pushed onto the top of the stack. When they are popped off again
                     the last one pushed will be the first one popped. Stacks are often referred
                     to as LIFOs (last in, first out).
                        Efficient parsers can be written if the grammar of the context-free
                     language is converted to Extended Backus-Naur Form.



                     Any grammar in EBNF is context-free. Each rule of the grammar defines
20.4 Extended        one symbol of the form.
Backus-Naur
                     symbol ::= expression
Form (EBNF)
                        In the above symbol and expression are non-terminals and represent
                     syntactic categories. Terminal symbols, or string literals, are given inside


ww                   quotes, for example “string” or ‘string’ is a literal string as given inside
                     the quotes. Brackets (. . .) can be used to group constituents.
                        Symbols may be combined to represent more complex patterns as in

   w     .Ea
                     Table 20.1.
                        Not all grammars can be converted to EBNF and a full description of
                     methods of conversion, when possible, is outside the scope of this book.
                     The following procedure works in simple cases.

            syE      1.
                        To convert a grammar to EBNF:
                          Remove left recursion, that is


                                ngi
                          N ::= E | NF

                        replace by N ::= E | EF∗ .

                                    n             eer
                           We can see that applying the rule N ::= NF twice gives N := NFF.
                        As this is a recursive rule we can continue applying it any number of
                        times, giving N ::= NFFF, N ::= NFFFF, N ::= NFFFFF, and so


                        finally we get N ::= E | EF∗ .
                                                               ing
                        on. The only way to have a right-hand side which does not include
                        N, that is, to remove the left recursion is to replace the N by E and

                     2. Left factor the grammar
                                                                            .ne
                     3.
                          N ::= EFG | EF G

                          replace by N ::= E(F | F )G.
                                                                                t
                          If N ::= E is not recursive remove it and replace all occurrences of
                          N in the grammar with E.

                              Table 20.1 Symbol patterns and their meaning in
                              EBNF, where A and B are simple expressions

                              Symbols                      Represents

                              A?         A or nothing and is referred to as ‘optional A’
                              A B        A followed by B
                              A|B        A or B but not both. This operator has lower
                                         precedence than followed by thus A B | C D
                                         is identical to (A B) | (C D)
                              A−B        any string that matches A but does not
                                         match B
                              A+         one or more repetitions of A
                              A*         zero or more repetitions of A



                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
