                                        Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                                             Language theory            489


                                              1.   A language is a set of sequences of symbols. A sequence of symbols
20.6 Summary                                       is called a string. An element of the language set is called a sentence.
                                                   A symbol which forms part of a sentence is called a terminal symbol.
                                              2.   Other symbols are used to express the grammar rules for the
                                                   language. These symbols are called non-terminal symbols.
                                              3.   A grammar consists of four things:
                                                   (a) A set of terminal symbols.
                                                   (b) A set of non-terminal symbols.
                                                   (c) A set of rewriting rules or productions. Every rule has a left-
                                                         hand side and right-hand side. The meaning of a rule is that
                                                         you can substitute its right-hand side for its left-hand side.
                                                   (d) A designated start symbol.
                                              4.   A sentence is grammatical if it can be produced by a series of
                                                   rewritings such that
                                                   (a) It starts with the start symbol.

ww                                            5.
                                                   (b) It uses grammar rules to get from one rewriting to the next.
                                                   (c) It does not contain any non-terminals.
                                                   A derivation, of one string of symbols, Y, from another string of

   w                     .Ea
                                                   symbols, X, is a sequence of applications of productions which
                                                   derives one string from another. If Y can be derived from X then we
                                                   can write X⇒∗ Y. The notation ‘⇒∗ ’ indicates zero or more steps
                                                   and ‘⇒’ indicates a single step.

                            syE               6.

                                              7.
                                                   Grammars that allow only a single non-terminal and nothing else
                                                   on the left-hand side of the rule are called context-free.
                                                   A derivation can be represented using a digraph. A derivation of a

                                                        ngi
                                                   context-free grammar can be represented as a directed tree called
                                                   the derivation tree.
                                              8.

                                                            n
                                                   Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF) is used to represent the syntax


                                                                           eer
                                                   of programming languages. Any grammar in EBNF is context-free.
                                                   This form of a grammar lends itself to the easy development of
                                                   a parser to check strings for validity.
                                              9.
                                                                                        ing
                                                   To convert a grammar to EBNF then remove left recursion, left
                                                   factor the grammar, if a rule N ::= E is not recursive remove it


                                                   symbol, using optional expressions where necessary..ne
                                                   and replace all occurrences of N in the grammar with E. Reduce the
                                                   grammar until there is a single production rule for each non-terminal

                                             10.   eXtensible Markup Language (XML) is a tool for defining
                                                                                                          t
                                                   markup languages. XML languages can be used to develop stan-
                                                   dards for the interchange of data and there are many XML
                                                   parsers available which will check an XML document for well-
                                                   formedness and validity. The structure of XML lends itself easily
                                                   to a tree representation – showing the derivation tree of the
                                                   document.



20.7 Exercises
20.1. A language, L, over the symbols a, b, and c, is defined   20.2. The language of the Boolean expressions over the set
      by the following grammar rules, where S is the start            {0,1} with the binary operations of + and · with brack-
      symbol.                                                         ets, (,), can be defined with the following grammar
                                                                      rules
      S → aS
      S → aB                                                           S → (S)B(S) | (S)BN | NB(S) | (S) | NBN | N
      B → bc                                                          N → 0|1
      Find a definition of the set L.                                 B → + |·


                                                                       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
