                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net




          21                        Probability and
                                    statistics

21.1                                Consider a system of computers and communication networks supporting


ww
Introduction
                                    a bank’s cash dispensing machines. The machines provide instant money
                                    on the street on production of a cash card and a personal identification
                                    code with the only prerequisite being that of a positive bank balance.

   w                 .Ea
                                       The communication network must be reliable – that is, not subject too
                                    often to break downs. The reliability of the system, or each part of the
                                    system, will depend on each component part.
                                       A very simple system, with only two components, can be configured

                        syE         in series or in parallel. If the components are in series then the system
                                    will fail if one component fails (Figure 21.1).
                                       If the components are in parallel then only one component need func-

                                              ngi
                                    tion (Figure 21.2) and we have built in redundancy just in case one of the
                                    components fails.


                                                  n
                                       A network could be made up of tens, hundreds, or even thousands


                                                                eer
                                    of components. It is important to be able to estimate the reliability of
                                    a complex system and therefore the rate of replacement of components
                                    necessary and the overall annoyance level of our customers should the
                                    system fail.
                                                                            ing
                                       The reliability will depend on the reliability of each one of the com-

                                    component will last.
                                                                                         .ne
                                    ponents but it is impossible to say exactly how long even one single

                                       We would like to be able to answer questions like:
                                    1.
                                    2.                                                       t
                                         What is the likely lifetime of any one element of the system?
                                         How can we estimate the reliability of the whole system by
                                         considering the interaction of its component parts?



Figure 21.1 Component A
and B must function for the
system to function.




Figure 21.2 Either
component A or component B
must function for the system
to function.



                                                             Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
