                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


494   Probability and statistics

                                   This is just one example of the type of problem for which we need the
                                   ideas of probability and statistics. Others are, a factory produces 1000
                                   electronic components each day where we wish to be able to estimate how
                                   many defective components are produced each day or a company with
                                   eight telephone lines where we wish to say whether that is a sufficient
                                   number, in general, for the number of calls likely to be received at any
                                   one time.
                                       All of these questions are those that need the ideas of probability and
                                   statistics. Statistics is used to analyse data and produce predictions about
                                   it . Probability is the theory upon which statistical models are built.
                                       For the engineering situations in previous chapters we have considered
                                   that we know all the factors that determine how a system will behave, that
                                   is, we have modelled the system deterministically. This is not very realis-
                                   tic. Any real situation will have some random element. Some problems,
                                   as the one we have just introduced, contain a large random element so
                                   that it is difficult to predict the behaviour of each part of the system. How-

ww                                 ever, it is possible to say, for instance, what the average overall behaviour
                                   would be.


   w
21.2 Population
                  .Ea              In statistics, we are generally interested in a ‘population’ that is too large
                                   for us to measure completely. For instance, we could be interested in all
and sample,
representation
of data, mean,
                     syE           the light bulbs that are produced by a certain manufacturer. The manufac-
                                   turer may claim that her light bulbs have a lifetime of 1500 h. Clearly this
                                   cannot be exact but we might be satisfied to agree with the manufacturer

variance and                                   ngi
                                   if most of the bulbs have a lifetime greater than 1500 h. If the factory
                                   produces half a million light bulbs per year then we do not have the time
                                   to test them all. In this case we test a ‘sample’. The larger the sample, the
standard
deviation                                          n
                                   more accurate will be the comparison with the whole population.

                                                                 eer
                                      We have recorded the lifetimes of samples of light bulbs in Table 21.1.
                                   We can build up a table to give information about our sample. Columns 8

                                                                              ing
                                   and 9 are given for comparison with statistical modelling and columns 4,
                                   6, and 7 are to help with the calculation. The following describes each
                                   column of Table 21.1, beginning with a list of the ‘raw’ data.

                                   Column 1: the class intervals                            .ne
                                                                                                t
                                   Find the minimum and the maximum of the data. The difference between
                                   these gives the range of the data. Choose a number of class intervals
                                   (usually up to about 20) so that the class range can be chosen as some
                                   multiple of 10, 100, 1000, etc. (like the class range of 100 above). The
                                   data range divided by the class range and then rounded up to the integer
                                   above gives the number of classes. The class intervals are chosen so that
                                   the lowest class minimum is less than the minimum data value. In our
                                   example, the lowest class minimum has been chosen as 900. Add the class
                                   range of 100 to find the class interval, for example, 900–1000. Carry on
                                   adding the class range to find the next class interval until you pass the
                                   maximum value.

                                   Column 2: the class midpoint
                                   The class midpoint is found by the maximum value in the class interval –
                                   the minimum value in the class interval divided by 2. For the interval
                                   1300–1400, the class midpoint is (1400 − 1300)/2 = 1350.
                                      The class midpoint is taken as a representative value for the class. That
                                   is, for the sake of simplicity we treat the data in the class 1300–1400 as

                                                              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
