                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


502   Probability and statistics




Figure 21.4   Histogram of the frequency distribution of the resistances given in Table 21.2.




 ww                                    Relative frequency and probability
                                       The probability of an event is related to its relative frequency. If I chose

    w                 .Ea
                                       a light bulb from the sample in Section 21.2, then the probability of its
                                       lifetime being between 1400 and 1500 h is 0.103. This is the same as the
                                       relative frequency for that class interval, that is, the number in the class
                                       interval divided by the total number of light bulbs in the sample. Here,

                         syE           we have assumed that we are no more likely to pick any one light bulb
                                       than any other, that is, each outcome is equally likely. The histogram of
                                       the relative frequencies (Figure 21.3 using the right-hand scale) gives the

                                                   ngi
                                       probability distribution function (or simply the probability function) for
                                       the lifetimes of the sample of light bulbs.


                                                       n
                                          As an introduction to probability, examples are often quoted involving


                                                                      eer
                                       throwing dice or dealing cards from a pack of playing cards. These are
                                       used because the probabilities of events are easy to justify and not because
                                       of any particular predilection on the part of mathematicians to a gambling
                                       vocation!
                                                                                     ing
                                       from one throw of the die, assuming it is fair.          .ne
                                       Example 21.2 A die has the numbers one to six marked on its sides.
                                       Draw a graph of the probability distribution function for the outcome


                                                                                                    t
                                       Solution If we throw the die 10 000 times we would expect the number
                                       of times each number appeared face up to be roughly the same. Here, we
                                       have assumed that the die is fair; that is, any one number is as likely to
                                       be thrown as any other. The relative frequencies would be approximately
                                       1/6. The probability distribution function, therefore, is a flat function with
                                       a value of 1/6 for each of the possible outcomes of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. This is
                                       shown in Figure 21.5
                                          Notice two important things about the probabilities in the probability
                                       distribution for the die:
                                       1.   each probability is less than 1;
                                       2.   the sum of all the probabilities is 1:
                                       1/6 + 1/6 + 1/6 + 1/6 + 1/6 + 1/6 = 1.


                                       Example 21.3 A pack of cards consists of four suits, hearts, diamonds,
                                       spades, and clubs. Each suit has 13 cards; that is, cards for the numbers
                                       1 (the ace) to 10 and a Jack, Queen, and King. Draw a graph of the
                                       probability distribution function for the outcome when dealing one card

                                                                  Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
