                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                         Probability and statistics           503




Figure 21.5 Probability
distribution for a fair die




ww
Figure 21.6 The probability


   w
distribution for suits from a
pack of cards.

                       .Ea
                          syE        from the pack, where only the suit is recorded. Assume the card is replaced
                                     each time and the pack is perfectly shuffled.


                                                ngi
                                     Solution If a card is selected, the suit recorded hearts, spades, clubs, or
                                     diamonds, the card is placed back in the pack and the pack is shuffled.


                                                    n
                                     If this is repeated (say 10 000 times) then we might expect that each suit


                                                                   eer
                                     will occur as often as any other, that is, 1/4 of the time. The probability
                                     distribution function again is a flat distribution, and has the value of 1/4
                                     for each of the possible four outcomes. The probability distribution for
                                     suits is given in Figure 21.6.
                                                                                ing
                                        Notice again that in Example 21.3 each probability is less than 1 and
                                     that the sum of all the probabilities is 1:

                                     4 + 4 + 4 + 4 = 1.
                                     1   1   1   1                                           .ne
                                                                                                 t
                                     We have seen that a probability distribution can be represented using a
                                     graph. Each item along the x-axis has an associated probability. Prob-
                                     ability is a function defined on some set. The set is called the sample
                                     space, S, and contains all possible outcomes of the random system. The
                                     probability distribution function is often abbreviated to p.d.f.


                                     Some definitions
                                     A trial is a single observation on the random system, for example,
                                     one throw of a die, one measurement of a resistance in the example
                                     in Section 21.2.
                                        The sample space is the set of all possible outcomes, for example, for
                                     the die it is the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, and for the resistance problem it is
                                     the set of all possible measured resistances. This set may be discrete or
                                     continuous. An event is a set of outcomes. For instance, A is the event
                                     of throwing less than 4 and B is the event of throwing a number greater
                                     than or equal to 5.
                                        An event is a subset of the sample space S.

                                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
