                            Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


504   Probability and statistics

                                      Notice that in the case of a continuous sample space an event is also
                                   a continuous set, represented by an interval of values. For example, C is
                                   the event that the resistance lies in the interval 2000 ± 1.5.


                                   Probability
                                   The way that probability is defined is slightly different for the case of a
                                   discrete sample space or a continuous sample space.


                                   Discrete sample space
                                   The outcome of any trial is uncertain; however, in a large number of trials
                                   the proportion showing a particular outcome approaches a certain number.
                                   We call this the probability of that outcome. The probability distribution


ww
                                   function, or simply probability function, gives the value of the probability
                                   that is associated with each outcome. The probability function obeys two
                                   important conditions:


   w              .Ea
                                   1.

                                   2.
                                        all probabilities are less than, or equal to 1, that is, 0 ⩽ p(x) ⩽ 1,
                                        where x is any outcome in the sample space;
                                        the
                                         probabilities of the individual outcomes sum to 1, that is,
                                            p(x) = 1.

                     syE           Continuous sample space
                                              ngi
                                   Considering a continuous sample space. We assign probabilities to inter-


                                                  n
                                   vals. We find the probability of, for instance, the resistance being in the
                                   interval 2000 ± 0.5. Hence, we assign probabilities to events and not to

                                                                  eer
                                   individual outcomes. In this case, the function that gives the probabilities
                                   is called the probability density function and we can find the probability of

                                                                              ing
                                   some event by integrating the probability density function over the inter-
                                   val. For instance, if we have a probability density function f (x), where
                                   x can take values from a continuous sample space, then the probability

                                                                                           .ne
                                   of x being in the interval a to b is given by, for example,


                                   P (a < x < b) =
                                                       b

                                                        a
                                                            f (x) dx.                          t
                                   The probability density function obeys the condition:
                                    ∞
                                         f (x) dx = 1
                                    −∞


                                   that is, the total area under the graph of the probability density function
                                   must be 1.


                                   Equally likely events
                                   If all outcomes are equally likely then the probability of an event E from
                                   a discrete sample set is given by

                                     The number of outcomes in E
                                                                     .
                                   The total number of outcomes in S

                                                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
