                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                             Probability and statistics             509




ww
   w
Figure 21.11 A probability tree for three tosses of a coin.


                      .Ea              The fourth property is one that is only true when the various repeated

                         syE           trials are independent, that is, the result of the first trial has no effect on
                                       the possible result of the second trial, etc.
                                        4.

                                                  ngi
                                             For independent trials, the tree keeps repeating the same structure
                                             with the same probabilities associated with the branches. Here, the
                                             event of getting a head on the third toss is independent of the event



                                       Example 21.7.
                                                      n
                                             of getting a head on the first or second toss.

                                                                      eer
                                       Using the tree we can find various probabilities, as we see in


                                                                                    ing
                                       Example 21.7 What is the probability on three tosses of the coin that
                                       exactly two of them will be heads?

                                                                                                  .ne
                                       Solution Count up all the ways that we could have two heads and one

                                       three possibilities:
                                                                                                      t
                                       tail, looking at the foot of the probability tree in Figure 21.11. We find


                                       HHT, HTH, THH

                                       each of these has probability of 18 . Therefore, the probability of exactly
                                       two heads is 38 .


                                       Picking balls from a bag without
                                       replacement
                                       We have 20 balls in a bag. Ten are red and ten are black. A ball is picked
                                       out of the bag, its colour recorded and then it is not replaced into the bag.
                                       There are two possible outcomes of each trial, red (R) or black (B). Let us
                                       consider three trials and their associated outcomes in a probability tree,
                                       as shown in Figure 21.12.
                                          To find the probabilities we consider how many balls remain in each
                                       case. If the first ball chosen is red then there are only 19 balls left of which 9
                                       are red and 10 are black; therefore, the probability of picking a red ball on
                                       the second trial is only 9/19 and the probability of picking black is 10/19.

                                                                   Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
