                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                           Probability and statistics           511


21.7                                   The probabilities we have been writing along the branches of the
                                       probability tree are called conditional probabilities.
Conditional
                                       Example 21.9 What is the probability that the first throw of a die will
probability and                        be a 5 and the second throw will be a 5 or 6?
probability trees                      Solution A is the set of those outcomes with the first throw a 5 and B
                                       is the set of those outcomes with the second throw a 5 or 6. We can use a
                                       probability tree in the following way. After the first throw of the die either
                                       A is true or not, that is, we have only two possibilities, A or A . After
                                       that, we are interested in whether B happens or not. Again we either get
                                       B or B . We get the probability tree as in Figure 21.13.
                                          Here, p(B|A) means the probability of B given A, similarly p(B|A )
                                       means the probability of B given (not A). We can fill in the probabilities
                                       using our knowledge of the fair die. The probability of A is 1/6. The


ww                                     second throw of the die is unaffected by the throw first throw of the die;
                                       therefore
                                       p(B) = p(throwing a 5 or a 6 on one throw of the die) = 26 = 13 .

   w                  .Ea              Working out the other probabilities gives the probability tree in
                                       Figure 21.14.


                         syE
                                          The probability that the first throw of a die will be a 5 and the second
                                       throw will be a 5 or 6 is p(B ∩ A), given from the tree in Figure 21.14 as

                                       6 × 3 = 18 .
                                       2   1    1


                                                  ngi
                                       Notice that the probability we have calculated is the intersection of the two


                                                      n
                                       events A and B, that is, we calculated the probability that both occurred.


                                                                     eer
                                       When multiplying the probabilities on the branches of the probability tree
                                       we are using the following:
                                       p(A ∩ B) = p(A)p(B|A).

                                                                                  ing
                                       Furthermore, because of independence we have used the fact that

                                                                                               .ne
                                       p(B|A) = p(B). That is, the probability of B does no depend on whether
                                       A has happened or not: B is independent of A. We, therefore, have the
                                       following important results.

                                                                                                   t

Figure 21.13 A probability tree showing conditional probabilities.




Figure 21.14 The
probability for Example 21.9.



                                                                 Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
