                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


512   Probability and statistics




Figure 21.15 Probability tree for Example 21.10.


                                     Multiplication law of probability
                                     p(A ∩ B) = p(A)p(B|A)
                                     This law applies for any two events A and B. It is the law used in finding
                                     the probabilities of the vertices of the probability trees.

 ww                                  Example 21.10 It is known that 10% of a selection of 100 elec-
                                     trical components are faulty. What is the probability that the first

    w                .Ea
                                     two components selected are faulty if the selection is made without
                                     replacement?
                                     Solution The probability we are looking for is:


                        syE          p(first faulty ∩ second faulty)
                                        = p(first faulty)p(second faulty | first faulty)


                                                   ngi
                                     Here there are only two possibilities at each stage, faulty or not faulty.
                                     The probability tree is as shown in Figure 21.15.


                                                       n
                                        Notice that their are only 99 components left after the first trial and


                                                                   eer
                                     whether the first was faulty or not changed the probability that the second
                                     is faulty or otherwise. Each branch of the tree, after the first layer,
                                     represents a conditional probability.
                                        The answer to our problem is therefore
                                     p(first faulty ∩ second faulty)
                                                                               ing
                                        = p(first faulty)p(second faulty | first faulty)
                                                                                             .ne
                                        =
                                          10
                                             ×
                                               9
                                          100 99
                                                 =
                                                    1
                                                   110
                                                       .
                                                                                                 t
                                     Condition of independence
                                     If two events A and B are independent then
                                     p(B|A) = p(B).
                                     Notice that the multiplication law changes in this case, as described below.


                                     Multiplication law of probability for
                                     independent events
                                     p(A ∩ B) = p(A)p(B).
                                     There is one other much-quoted law of probability that completes all the
                                     basic laws from which probabilities can be worked out. That is Bayes’s
                                     theorem and it comes from the multiplication law.

                                                                Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
