                               Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                                       Probability and statistics         517


21.10 The                           The normal distribution is symmetric about its mean. It is bell-shaped
                                    and the fatness of the bell depends on its standard deviation. Examples
normal                              are given in Figure 21.20 and 21.21.
distribution                           The normal distribution is very important because of the following
                                    points:
                                    1.   Many practical distributions approximate to the normal distribution.
                                         Look at the histograms of lifetimes given in Figure 21.3 and of resis-
                                         tances given in Figure 21.4 and you will see that they resemble the
                                         normal distribution. Another common example is the distribution
                                         of errors. If you were to get a large group of students to measure
                                         the diameter of a washer to the nearest 0.1 mm, then a histogram of
                                         the results would give an approximately normal distribution. This is
                                         because the errors in the measurement are normally distributed.
                                    2.   The central limit theorem. If we take a large number of samples from


ww                                       a population and calculate the sample means then the distribution of
                                         the sample means will behave like the normal distribution for all pop-
                                         ulations (even those populations which are not distributed normally).


   w                  .Ea
                                         This is as a result of what is called the central limit theorem. There
                                         is a project exploring the behaviour of sample means given in the
                                         Projects and Investigations available on the companion website for
                                         this book.


                         syE        3.   Many other common distributions become like the normal distribu-
                                         tion in special cases. For instance, the binomial distribution, which
                                         we shall look at in Section 21.12, can be approximated by the normal


                                               ngi
                                         when the number of trials is very large.



                                                   n
                                    Finding probabilities from
                                    a continuous graph
                                                                 eer
                                                                             ing
                                    Before we look at the normal distribution in more detail we need to find
                                    out how to relate the graph of a continuous function to our previous idea
                                    of probability. In Section 21.3, we identified the probability of a class

                                                                                          .ne
                                    with its relative frequency in a frequency distribution. That was all right
                                    when we had already divided the various sample values into classes.


                                                                                              t
                                    The problem with the normal distribution is that is has no such divisions
                                    along the x-axis and no individual class heights, just a nice smooth curve.




Figure 21.20 A normal
distribution with µ = 0 and
σ = 1 (called the standard
normal distribution N(0,1)).




Figure 21.21 Normal
distribution with µ = 2 and
σ = 3.



                                                              Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
