       Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.net


                                                Probability and statistics           525

            Solution Assign the outcome of obtaining a head to 1 and tail to 0.
            Assume that the coin is fair and therefore θ = 21 , 1 − θ = 21 . The
            probability of obtaining three heads in five tosses of a coin is given by
            the binomial probability:
                                                 
                      5! 3               5×4 1 3 1 2
            p5 (3) =      θ (1 − θ) =
                                    2
                                                             = 0.3125.
                     3!2!                 2!    2       2



            Mean and variance of a single trial
                                                                                
            The mean of a discrete distribution can be found by using µ =           xp(x)
            and the variance is
                  
            σ2 =     (x − µ)2 p(x)


ww          where the summation is over the sample space.
              We can use these to find the mean and variance of a single trial with only
            two outcomes, success or failure. The outcome of success has the value 1

   w.Ea
            and occurs with probability θ and the outcome of failure has the value 0
            with probability 1−θ . Then, the mean is given by 1×θ +(1−θ)×0 = θ .
              The variance of a single trial is given by


       syE  (1 − θ)2 θ + (0 − θ)2 (1 − θ) = θ − 2θ 2 + θ 3 + θ 2 − θ 3 = θ(1 − θ).
            ↑    ↑   ↑     ↑    ↑    ↑
            x   µ
                       ngi
                     p(1) x    µ p(0)
            The standard deviation is the square root of the variance:
                 
            σ = θ(1 − θ).
                           n              eer
            The mean and standard deviation of
            the binomial distribution                  ing
                                                                    .ne
            The expressions involving a summation over the entire sample space
            can be used to find the mean and standard deviation of the binomial

                                                                        t
            distribution but they take a bit of manipulation to find. Instead, we can
            take a short cut and use the fact that each trial is independent. The mean
            of the union of n trials is given by the sum of the means of the n trials.
            Similarly (for independent trials only), the variance of the union of the n
            trials is given by the sum of the variances.
               Therefore, the mean of the binomial distribution for n trials is given
            by the number of trials × mean for a single trial = nθ . The variance is
            given by nθ (1 − θ) and therefore the standard deviation is
                  
            σ = nθ(1 − θ).

            Example 21.15 A file of data is stored on a magnetic tape with a parity
            bit stored with each byte (8 bits) making 9 bits in all. The parity bit is set
            so that the 9 bits add up to an even number. The parity bit allows errors
            to be detected, but not corrected. However, if there are two errors in the
            9 bits then the errors will go undetected, three errors will be detected,
            four errors undetected, etc. A very poor magnetic tape was tested for the
            reproduction of 1024 bits and 16 errors were found. If on one record on
            the tape there are 4000 groups of 9 bits, estimate how many bytes will
            have undetected errors.

                                      Downloaded From : www.EasyEngineering.netTLFeBOOK
